NPL Site Narrative for 29th & Mead
Ground Water Contamination
 
29TH & MEAD GROUND WATER CONTAMINATION
Wichita, Kansas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The 29th & Mead Ground Water Contamination Site covers
approximately 1,440 acres in a highly industrialized area of Wichita, Sedgwick County, Kansas. The
intersection of 29th and Mead Streets is at the approximate center of the site. Among contaminants
detected in significant concentrations in ground water are trichloroethylene, carbon tetrachloride, toluene,
benzene, ethylbenzene, methylene chloride, trans- and/or cis-1,2-dichloroethylene, vinyl chloride,
and 1,1,1-trichloroethane. The compounds were identified in investigations conducted by the Kansas
Department of Health and Environment (KDHE) and the U.S. Geological Survey from 1983 to 1986. The
actual boundary and extent of contamination have not been clearly defined. An estimated 3,300 people
obtain drinking water from public and private wells completed in the shallow aquifer within 3 miles of the
site.
 
The site is in the drainage basin of Chisolm Creek, which is used for recreational activities.
 
KDHE has identified more than 70 potentially responsible parties (PRPs) associated with the
contamination, among them currently operating facilities and others no longer operating. In 1987, the
parties organized the Wichita North Industrial District (WNID) PRP group and formed a steering committee
to negotiate future investigation and remedial activities.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In September 1989, 12 members of the WNID PRP group and KDHE signed
a Consent Agreement for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and
extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The agreement includes an
approved workplan for the RI/FS, which is now in progress.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
