 
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Proposed Site*** September 2014 
35TH AVENUE  Birmingham, Alabama   
 Jefferson  County  
 
 Site Location: 
The 35th Avenue site consists of residential soil contamination in the neighborhoods of Collegeville, Fairmont and Harriman Park in northern Birmingham, Alabama. The contaminated neighborhoods are  surrounded by industrial facilities associated with coke manufacturing, and iron and steel industries.  
 Site History: 
Residential soils have been contaminated from air deposition or “borrow”  fill soil potentially from the operation of several facilities in the area. One facility is the Walter Coke, Inc. operation which manufactures foundry and furnace  coke as well as coke by-products in 122 coke ovens. Additional potential sources include: ABC Coke; U.S.  Pipe, a lead foundry, KMAC Recycling & Industrial Services  and Alagasco Corporation.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The primary contaminants of concern are benzo(a)pyrene, a rsenic and lead in residential soils. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Hundreds of residential lots are contaminated with benzo(a)pyrene , arsenic, or lead exceeding health risk exposure standards. The total site area encompasses more than 2,000 properties and more than 1,000 total acres.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
The EPA has sampled more than 1,000 properties  and is currently conducting soil removal actions at  50 of the highest contaminated properties.   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The site area is very large and there are numerous potential industries which have contributed to the contamination. Hundreds of properties remain contaminated at levels which exceed health -based benchmark levels. A single, comprehensive assessment and remediation of contaminated residential soils is needed. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.  See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
 
