NPL Site Narrative for 57th and North
Broadway Streets Site
 
57TH AND NORTH BROADWAY STREETS SITE
Wichita Heights, Kansas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 7, 1992) : The 57th and North Broadway Streets Site is in Wichita
Heights, a residential/commercial area near Wichita, Sedgewick County, Kansas. Soil and residential and
industrial wells on the approximately 180-acre area are contaminated with volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) and metals. The intersection of the two streets is close to the approximate center of the major
sources of contamination.
 
Ground water contamination at the site was first identified in 1983 when an area resident complained about
bad water. In 1984, the Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE) investigated the site.
Follow-up investigations were conducted by KDHE (1985 and 1987) and EPA (1990). These investigations
have identified the following VOCs and metals in area wells: benzene, 2,4-dimethylphenol, 1,4-dioxane,
ethylbenzene, toluene, xylene, various chlorinated compounds, arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium, and
lead.
 
A 1989 KDHE soil-gas survey identified four sources that may be major contributors to contamination in the
vicinity of 57th Street and North Broadway Street: Midland Refining Co., which operates a waste oil refining
plant; Clearwater Trucking Co.; Crossroads Fina Station, abandoned in 1988 or 1989; and the former Wilko
Paint Factory, which generated paint sludge and cooling water until it was abandoned in 1980 or 1981.
 
Other potential sources include Carlson Co., Sinclair Station, the former Tom's Tire Co., Radium
Petroleum, Hills Market, an abandoned gas station, an alleged landfill, Magill Trucking Co., Cummings
Diesel, and Northcutt Trailer. KDHE continues to search for other sources.
 
In 1990, EPA began providing bottled water to area residents and small businesses, using CERCLA
emergency funds; a water-supply line funded by a State grant is under construction.
 
Status (October 1992) : Because the water supply line has been completed, EPA has stopped distributing
bottled water. EPA is investigating the site to determine what further action may be needed.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
