NPL Site Narrative for 68th Street Dump
 
68TH STREET DUMP
Baltimore, Maryland
 
 
The 68th Street Dump site consists of five sources. Eighteen acres of the site (along the western
boundary) are located within the City of Baltimore and the remainder of the site is located near the town
of Rosedale in Baltimore County, Maryland. The five sources that make up the 68th Street Dump site
were used as landfills from the 1950s through the 1970s. Historical inspection reports, accounts from
former waste haulers and employees, and EPA investigations of potential generators provide evidence
that industrial wastes were disposed of at the 68th Street Dump site. Hazardous substances detected
in samples collected from the five sources that comprise the site include: volatile organic compounds,
polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), pesticides, and metals.
 
Three removal actions have occurred at the site. In 1982, up to 23 drums of hazardous waste (due to
elevated lead and cadmium concentrations) were removed from Source 5. In 1984, 10 drums were
removed from Source 4; one contained paint sludge whereas the remainder were empty and badly
deteriorated. In 1985, a fire at Source 3 initiated an EPA emergency response action that concluded with
the removal of 40 drums partially filled with solvents.
 
Prior to dumping activities, the entire area of the 68th Street Dump site was covered with wetland
vegetation. Historical aerial photographs taken of the area document the filling of these wetlands and
adjacent stream channels, documenting observed releases by direct observation. Surface water bodies
that flow through the site include Herring Run, Moore's Run, Redhouse Run, and unnamed tributaries to
Herring Run. The Back River and Chesapeake Bay are located along the 15-mile surface water pathway
target distance limit (TDL) for the site. Targets within the 15-mile TDL include the Herring Run, Back
River, and Chesapeake Bay fisheries and over 23 miles of wetland frontage. Analytical results of sediment
samples collected from the Herring Run fishery downstream of the site document contamination with
PAHs, lead, and zinc. Analytical results of samples collected from wetlands remaining at the 68th Street
Dump site document elevated concentrations of PAHs, PCBs, and metals.
 
A separate HRS score has been calculated for each of the five sources evaluated in this HRS
documentation record. The documentation supporting each of these individual scores is provided in
Appendices C through G of the documentation record.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
