 
 
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site***                                                                                                                                                   May  2013 
700 SOUTH 1600 EAST PCE PLUME Salt Lake City, Utah 
 Salt Lake County 
 
 Site Location: 
The site is located in a residential area near the University of Utah in Salt Lake City, Utah .  
 
 Site History: 
Tetrachloroethylene (PCE) contamination was first found in 1990 at the nearby Mount Olivet Cemetery during routine monitoring by Salt Lake City. This led to the EPA’s involvement at the site. NPL listing efforts for this site were suspended in 2008 because the city wanted to pursue other options to address the contamination. In June 2010, the city reported elevated levels of PCE in residential springs down gradient of the site. The only identified source of the contamination is a historic dry-cleaning facility owned and operated by a Department of Veterans Affairs Hospital (VA).   
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The area of PCE contamination covers more than 200 acres based on sampling. However, the full extent of the ground water plume is currently unknown.  
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Contaminated ground water is the primary concern at this site. In 1998, PCE levels in a ground water monitoring well at the site reached levels well above the federal Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level (MCL). By 2004, PCE was found in a municipal well at a concentration above health based benchmarks but below the MCL. In 2010, levels of PCE found in residential springs reached levels well above the MCL. With the high concentrations of PCE found nearby, additional public and private water resources are at risk of being contaminated. Contamination in shallow ground water also indicates a potential for vapor intrusion (indoor inhalation exposures).  
 
 Response Activities (to date): 
There have been no response activities.  
 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
In 2004, municipal well SLC-18 was determined to have a PCE concentration above the health based concentration but below the MCL. As a precautionary measure, Salt Lake City took this well off -line in 2005, and it has remained off-line since. Vapor intrusion is also a possibility for the community overlying the contamination. A long -term solution for addressing contamination is necessary because left uncontrolled, the plume could continue to migrate putting additional public water supplies and residents at risk. NPL listing will enable the contamination to be addressed. The EPA received letters of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Utah and the city of Salt Lake City. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can  be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
 
