NPL Site Narrative for A.I.W. Frank Corp./
Mid-County Mustang
 
A.I.W. FRANK CORP./MID-COUNTY MUSTANG
Exton, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The A.I.W. Frank Corp. (AIW)/Mid-County Mustang Site
covers 16 acres in Exton, Chester County, Pennsylvania. Originally farmland, the area is undergoing
rapid development to a residential, commercial, and light industrial area. During 1962-81, AIW produced
styrofoam cups and plates and used trichloroethylene (TCE) and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (1,1,1-TCEA) to
clean its machinery. The operation covers 15 acres at 717 East Lincoln Highway. Continental Refrigerator
Corp. acquired the property in 1981 when AIW went bankrupt. Continental manufactures refrigerators,
freezers, and warming cabinets for the institutional and food service industry.
 
Investigations by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER) indicate that AIW
handled and disposed of solvents improperly. In early 1983, a consultant to the company found that an on-
site monitoring well was contaminated with TCE, tetrachloroethylene (PCE), and 1,1,1-TCEA.
 
The Mid-County Mustang facility covers less than 1 acre at 891 East Lincoln Highway adjacent to the
western boundary of AIW. Mid-County Mustang leased this property from the summer of 1982 until
December 1984 from CDS Investments. Since the 1940s, the building leased by Mid-County Mustang has
been used as an auto repair and/or body shop. The solvents used to clean auto engines were discharged
into floor drains in the building and from there into an on-site stone bed drain field. In December 1983, a
consultant to CDS Investments detected TCE, PCE, methylene chloride, and carbon tetrachloride at the
floor drain and drain field. A hydrogeologic investigation of the neighboring AIW facility showed that a well
on the Mid-County Mustang property was contaminated with TCE, PCE, and 1,1,1-TCEA.
 
An estimated 76,700 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Surface water within 3 miles downstream of the site is used for recreational activities and is threatened
because run-off from the site could flow into Valley Creek 800 feet to the north.
 
The site is unfenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with hazardous
substances.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA is conducting a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
