NPL Site Narrative for ABC One Hour
Cleaners
 
ABC ONE HOUR CLEANERS
Jacksonville, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : ABC One Hour Cleaners has operated at 2127 Lejeune
Boulevard, Jacksonville, Onslow County, North Carolina, since 1954. The 1-acre site consists of three
buildings joined to form one complex.
 
Tetrachloroethylene, a dry-cleaning solvent, was stored in a 250-gallon aboveground tank in the rear
building. Spent solvent is reclaimed by a filtration-distillation system, also in the rear building. Still bottoms
generated from the recycling are the only known hazardous waste generated at the site. Until about 1985,
they were buried on the site. Currently, they are transported to a hazardous waste facility regulated under
Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. A septic tank-soil absorption system, also in
the rear building, consists of an underground concrete tank with a concrete lid. It has always been used for
storage of waste water.
 
In 1984, the nearby Camp Lejeune Marine Corps Base collected samples from 40 community supply
wells. (The base is also being proposed for the NPL at this time.) Organic contaminants were detected
in three wells near two off-base dry-cleaning facilities. Since both cleaners, ABC One Hour Cleaners and
Glam-O-Rama Dry Cleaners, were potential sources, the Marine Corps requested assistance from the
North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and Community Development (NRCD). NRCD drilled
three monitoring wells to help define the source of contamination. Tetrachloroethylene was detected in the
monitoring wells and the three nearby community wells. Levels in a monitoring well at ABC--12,000 parts
per billion (ppb)--and two community wells southeast of the site--1,580 and 132 ppb--were significantly
higher than the 2.2 ppb found in a monitoring well at Glam-O-Rama. NRCD inspected the area where
the solvent is stored and determined that it enters the septic tank-soil absorption system. From the study,
NRCD concluded that ABC One Hour Cleaners is the source of tetrachloroethylene in ground water.
Trichloroethylene, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, vinyl chloride, benzene, and toluene were also detected at
low levels in some of the wells. An estimated 41,000 people obtain their drinking water from three public
well systems within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA has sent notice letters to parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site informing them of their potential liability. EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989
includes a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the
site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
