NPL Site Narrative for Aberdeen Pesticide
Dumps
 
ABERDEEN PESTICIDE DUMPS
Aberdeen, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Aberdeen Pesticide Dumps Site is in Aberdeen, a rural
area in Moore County, North Carolina. The site consists of five dumps within 2 miles of each other. All but
one are privately owned.
 
The 1.5-acre Fairway Six dump was discovered in August 1984 during construction of a golf course. In
October 1984, the North Carolina Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Branch (SHWMB) found
several bags labeled toxaphene and noted a strong chemical odor. SHWMB analyses found DDT, DDD,
toxaphene, and lindane (BHC) in the soil.
 
The Twin dumps cover about 1 acre; one is privately owned and one is owned by Aberdeen and used for
recreation. They are separated by 350 feet. The dumps were reported to SHWMB in August 1984 by State
highway personnel who had smelled chemical odors in the area. SHWMB detected various pesticides in
Twin dumps soil. Several operations have manufactured pesticides in a building 500 feet from the dumps:
Taylor Chemical Co. (1936-64); E-Z Flo, owned by Union Carbide Corp. (1964-72); and Farm Chemicals,
Inc. (1972 to the present).
 
The 1-acre McIver pesticide dump was discovered in November 1984 when SHWMB, acting on information
provided by a citizen, found 200-300 55-gallon pesticide drums in Lucks Landfill, a rubble landfill on a
leased portion of the McIver property. The State determined that the drums contained parathion and had
been shipped by Farm Chemicals. Soil at the landfill contains many of the same pesticides found at the
other dumps. Further investigation found another area where pesticides had been dumped.
 
In February 1985, the State, Farm Chemicals, and Lucks Construction Co. signed an Administrative Order
on Consent requiring the companies to remove the drums from the McIver dump. In March 1985, 687
drums were removed, steam cleaned, triple rinsed, crushed, and sent to the Moore County landfill. Rinsate
was applied to farm land as per label directions for the pesticide.
 
In June 1985, using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA removed pesticide-contaminated soil and wastes
from the Fairway Six, Twin, and McIver dumps. Following the removal, the 0.75-acre Route 211 dump was
reported by the owner. SHWMB investigated, finding a pile containing cardboard containers, pesticide bags
(one marked Taylor Chemical), powders, and tarry residues. SHWMB detected various pesticides in soil.
 
The 0.5-acre Farm Chemicals dump is about 500 feet from the Twin dumps. The company has
manufactured pesticides since 1972. Previously, E-Z Flo and Taylor Chemical manufactured pesticides
there. After discovery of the four other dumps, EPA investigations in May 1986 found pesticides and
PCB-1242 at the Farm Chemicals dump.
 
Soils at all five areas are permeable, facilitating movement of contaminants into ground water. Nearby
Page's Lake is also threatened. About 5,100 people draw drinking water from public and private wells
within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
