 
   
    
  
   
   
   
   
    
  
    
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2008 
ABERDEEN CONTAMINATED Aberdeen, North Carolina GROUND WATER Moore County 
àSite Location: The one acre site is located on highway Route 211 in Aberdeen, Moore County, North Carolina.  The site is less than ½ mile from the Geigy Chemical Company NPL site. ´Site History: Powdered Metal Products (PMP) manufactured precision machine parts at the facility from 1980 until 1995.  The operation utilized a trichloroethene (TCE) dip-vat as part of  the manufacturing process.  During the investigation of ground water contamination at the Geigy Chemical Corporation NPL site in 1990, which is located just on the other side of State Route 211, TCE, lead and pesticide cont amination was detected in numerous private wells along Crestline Lane and Route 211. Investigations have identified contaminated soils in the vicinity of the former TCE dip-vat utilized by PMP as the source of TCE contamination in the ground water.   rSite Contamination/Contaminants: TCE contamination has been detected in numerous private wells, and in the Town of Aberdeen municipal water supply wells No. 5 and No. 9 near the facility.  Detected levels of TCE have exceeded the federal Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level (MCL) for TCE of 5 parts per billion. vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: EPA has provided municipal water supplies to 56 residences and businesses in the area.  The Town of Aberdeen had taken municipal wells No. 5 and No. 9 off-line, but is now currently blending water from these wells with water from other municipal wells to reduce TCE levels below the MCL. 3Response Activities (to date): Municipal water supplies were provided by EPA to address the contaminated private wells along Crestline Lane.  EPA has conducted numerous ground water investigations in the area, including the investigation of ground water contamination at the Geigy Chemical NPL site.  The Geigy Chemical site has a ground water extraction system which is capturing part of the TCE plume.  EPA and the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources (NC DENR) also conducted investigations in an attempt to identify the source of the TCE contamination. }Need for NPL Listing: The State of North Carolina referred the site to EPA because of increasing levels of TCE contamination threatening the municipal water supply wells for the Town of Aberdee n.  Other cleanup alternatives were evaluated, but are not viable at this time because Powdered Metal Products is no longer a viable company and the state does not have the resources to cleanup the source of the TCE contamination at the PMP site and in the ground water.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.   
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
