NPL Site Narrative for Ace Services
 
ACE SERVICES
Colby, Kansas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 13, 1995) : The Ace Services site is a former chrome plating facility
where chrome plating was applied to farm implement parts. The Ace Services facility operated from 1969
to 1989 and was permanently closed in March 1990. The Ace Services site is located on approximately
2.4 acres in the eastern part of the City of Colby, a northwestern Kansas agricultural community with a
total population of 6,525 including college students and nearby rural residents. Structural features currently
at the Ace Services site include the operations buildings and a former lagoon area. Residences and
commercial property surround the site which lies approximately 200 feet west of an unnamed intermittent
tributary to Prairie Dog Creek. Prairie Dog Creek is an intermittent stream approximately 2.5 miles
northeast of the site.
 
Ground water from the Ogallala Aquifer represents the sole source of municipal and private drinking water
in and around Colby. The Colby municipal well public water supply well no. 8, located 0.2 miles east of
the Ace Services site, was closed in 1980 on orders from Kansas Department of Health and Environment
(KDHE) due to chromium in the ground water at concentrations above the Federal maximum contaminant
level drinking water standard for chromium. An estimated 6,180 people are currently served by seven
Colby municipal system supply wells. All of the wells are located within a 4-mile radius of the site, and each
well draws from the Ogallala Aquifer. The depths of the municipal wells range from 202 to 281 feet below
ground surface.
 
From 1969 to 1975, chrome plating wastewater generated during operations at the Ace Services facility
was discharged directly to the ground surface immediately west of the unnamed tributary to Prairie Dog
Creek. A citizen's complaint regarding the Ace Services facility was filed with KDHE in March 1971.
Analytical data from samples of the discharged wastewater collected by KDHE and EPA in 1971 and 1972
indicated the presence of chromium. In 1974 and 1975, concrete retention vats were installed at the Ace
Services facility, and an evaporation lagoon was constructed immediately adjacent to the facility to receive
discharged wastewater. However, the evaporation lagoon was not lined, and chromium-contaminated
wastewater was allowed to contaminate the soil and infiltrate into the ground. Also on site are chrome
plating solutions, bulk hazardous wastes, and caustic acidic processing materials contained in vats and
drums that were previously stored inside the Ace Services facility.
 
KDHE has recommended that a remedial investigation and feasibility study be undertaken to determine
what action should be taken to remediate the contaminated ground water in the vicinity of the site. KDHE
has also recommended that contaminated soils in the lagoon area should be properly remediated to
remove a continuing source of contamination.
 
In 1981, Ace Services excavated approximately 2,200 cubic yards of chromium contaminated soil and
sludge from the Ace Services lagoon area and disposed of it at the Thomas County landfill, a municipal
solid waste sanitary landfill. In March 1992, KDHE removed the bulk hazardous liquid and solid wastes
stored inside the Ace Services facility. Ace Services installed a recovery well at the site in 1980, to be used
to extract contaminated ground water from the Ogallala Aquifer. This recovery system never became fully
operational. KDHE installed three monitoring wells at the site in 1990.
 
EPA completed a removal action in July 1994, which consisted of removing residual contamination (mainly
dusts) from the building interior, excavation of a concrete trough and the underlying soil, installation of
additional building support columns near the trough, demolition of the wastewater treatment building,
excavation of underlying soil, and excavation and stabilization/treatment of lagoon soil. All waste was
shipped offsite for disposal, except for approximately 3,000 gallons of wastewater, which was treated
onsite and discharged to a publicly-owned treatment works.
 
Status (September 1995) : EPA is currently considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
