NPL Site Narrative for Acme Solvents
Reclaiming, Inc. (Morristown Plant)
 
ACME SOLVENTS RECLAIMING, INC. (MORRISTOWN PLANT)
Morristown, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : The Acme Solvents Reclaiming, Inc., Site covers 20 acres in a rural
area of Winnebago County, about 1.5 miles from Morristown, Illinois. Starting in 1960, Acme reclaimed
waste solvents through distillation. Still bottom material and waste drums, both full and empty, were
disposed of into numerous shallow, unlined pits. In late 1972, the State started an administrative action
requiring Acme to stop its disposal operations. In 1973, the waste ponds were covered over, although
partially buried drums are still visible.
 
Monitoring by the State and county, which started in April 1981, detected low levels of organic compounds,
including trichloroethylene, methylene chloride, and tetrachloroethylene, in shallow private wells. Four
private wells were closed, and the residents began to use bottled water. The shallow aquifers are
hydrologically connected to the deeper, highly productive aquifers that supply water to large industrial and
municipal wells in the Rockford vicinity.
 
Status (July 1983) : In August 1982, EPA issued Notice Letters requesting that the owners of Acme
undertake a hydrogeologic investigation at the site. Acme declined. In June 1983, EPA awarded a
$292,365 Cooperative Agreement to Illinois for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The work is
scheduled to be completed in the second quarter of 1984.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
