NPL Site Narrative for Advanced Micro
Devices, Inc.
 
ADVANCED MICRO DEVICES, INC.
Sunnyvale, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., manufactures electronic
equipment at a plant in Sunnyvale, Santa Clara County, California. The facility occupies about 6 acres and
is surrounded by residential, industrial, and business areas.
 
Monitoring wells on the site are contaminated with chloroform, 1,1-dichloroethylene, 1,1-dichloroethane,
trichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene, according to analyses conducted by a consultant to Advanced
Micro Devices, Inc. Contamination is believed to have resulted from localized spills and leaking
underground storage tanks and piping. The same contaminants have been detected in monitoring wells off-
site. About 300,000 people depend on wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
The company has removed an acid neutralization tank from the facility and is working with the California
Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB) to determine the extent of contamination of ground
water and soils. The board issued a Cleanup and Abatement Order to the company in June 1984.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : CRWQCB issued Waste Discharge Requirements to the company in August
1985. The requirements are the board's legal mechanism for regulating activities at facilities under its
jurisdiction. CRWQCB, in conjunction with EPA and the California Department of Health Services, is
considering various response actions at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
