NPL Site Narrative for Aerojet General
Corp.
 
AEROJET GENERAL CORP.
Rancho Cordova, California
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Aerojet General Corp. Site covers 8,500 acres in the eastern
portion of Sacramento County, California, adjacent to the Rancho Cordova area (population 40,000).
The northeast edge of the site is approximately 0.5 mile from the American River. Underlying the site are
extensive (50-foot deep) gold dredge tailings, a remnant of past mining operations. The upper aquifer is 80
feet below the surface. Ground water is used extensively throughout the Rancho Cordova area to supply
municipal, domestic, and industrial water.
 
Since 1953, Aerojet and its subsidiaries have disposed of, on-site, unknown quantities of hazardous waste,
including trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene, chloroform, Freon and other chemicals associated with
rocket propellants, and various chemical processing wastes. Soil on-site is contaminated. Monitoring data
show extensive ground water contamination on- and off-site, primarily with trichloroethylene. In April 1979,
Aerojet and its subsidiaries started ground water studies to examine the impact of past disposal practices
and to determine the requirements for cleanup.
 
In December 1979, the State filed suit against Aerojet and a subsidiary, Cordova Chemical.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA has worked with the State since 1979, providing technical assistance through
the Emergency Response Team, the Las Vegas lab, and Region IX. In March 1982, the State requested
EPA's assistance in evaluating Aerojet's "Proposal for a Ground Water Quality Control Program." EPA
found major technical problems in Aerojet's proposal. In the past, a confidentiality agreement between
Aerojet and the State limited EPA access to the documents that would allow EPA to independently assess
the company's progress toward cleanup. The agreement is no longer in effect.
 
On February 25, 1983, Region IX requested information from Aerojet regarding soil and ground water
contamination. EPA will soon complete review of the documents received in response.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
