NPL Site Narrative for Agriculture Street
Landfill
 
AGRICULTURE STREET LANDFILL
New Orleans, Louisiana
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (August 23, 1994) : The Agriculture Street Landfill site is located in New Orleans,
Orleans Parish, Louisiana, approximately 3 miles south of Lake Pontchartrain. The site is bounded on the
north by Higgins Boulevard, on the east by Piety Street, on the south by Florida Avenue, and on the west
by Almonaster Avenue.
 
The Agriculture Street Landfill site was used as a municipal landfill as early as 1910. There is little
information available regarding what was deposited in the landfill during this time period. Review of
available file material suggests that the landfill received both solid and liquid wastes. This practice
continued until 1950, when the advent of incinerators for ultimate disposal of these wastes was instituted.
After the commissioning of the Florida Street Incineration Facility, combustible waste was incinerated and
the ashes were disposed in the landfill. In approximately 1958, the operation at the landfill was interrupted;
in 1965, the landfill reopened after Hurricane Betsy hit the City of New Orleans. Debris from destroyed
buildings and furnishings were reportedly deposited at a rate of up to 300 truck loads per day. The debris
was burned in the open dump; the area was covered with ashes from the city incinerators and compacted
with bulldozers.
 
Residential and commercial development of the area began in the mid-1970s and continued until 1987.
Low income housing was constructed within the original boundaries of the landfill, including approximately
250 residences and the Gordon Plaza Apartments. The majority of the residents are minorities.
 
A Site Inspection (SI) was conducted by EPA Region 6 on May 20 and 21, 1986. During the inspection,
a total of 45 soil samples were collected on site. Results from the SI indicated that lead, zinc, mercury,
cadmium, and arsenic were elevated in some samples. Concentrations in 12 of the 45 total samples
exceeded 1,000 ppm lead, with three samples having lead concentrations greater than 4,000 ppm.
The highest lead concentrations were found in an undeveloped area along the western and southern
site boundaries; however, elevated lead levels were also found in other residential sample locations.
Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PNAs) were detected in almost every soil sample.
 
EPA Region 6 completed an Expanded Site Inspection in September 1993 at this site. EPA collected 133
surface soil samples and five subsurface soil samples from the site, residential yards, and school yards
surrounding the site. Soil contamination is of concern due to observed contamination within residential
yards. Chemical analyses of surface soil samples collected from 24 residential yards revealed the
presence of arsenic and benzo(a)pyrene.
 
Status (December 1994) : A Remedial Investigation (RI) was completed in November 1994. The Feasibility
Study is expected to be completed in early 1995 and will be released for public comments on possible
remedies for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
