NPL Site Narrative for Alabama Army
Ammunition Plant
 
ALABAMA ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT
Childersburg, Alabama
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Alabama Army Ammunition Plant (AAAP) covers 5,168
acres just east of the Coosa River north of Childersburg, Talladega County, Alabama. The U.S. Army
terminated manufacturing operations in August 1945. The plant was in standby status until 1973, when it
was declared excess property.
 
Explosives manufactured at AAAP included trinitrotoluene, dinitrotoluene, nitrocellulose, and tetryl. Most
of the structures used in manufacturing have been demolished and/or destroyed by controlled burning.
Source of contamination include disposal sites, as well as spills and general wastes in the manufacturing
process.
 
Both ground water and surface water are contaminated with trinitrotoluene and dinitrotoluene, according to
analyses conducted by the Army. Surface water is also contaminated with lead. Ground water is the source
of drinking water in the area, with the exception of one intake on the Coosa River. The City of Childersburg
uses ground water for drinking water. Talladega Creek, which may be considered a ground water divide,
is located between AAAP and the city. The total population using the river as a source of drinking water is
estimated to be 1,800, and the population using ground water is estimated to be 700.
 
AAAP is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed a records search and a preliminary survey. Remedial action has been
completed in an area know as the Leaseback Area.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The Army is continuing with remedial action in areas outside the Leaseback Area.
EPA wants the Army to certify that parts of AAAP that the Army plans to release for general use are clean.
 
The Army has completed a remedial investigation for the entire site and a feasibility study to identify
alternatives for remedial action. EPA has reviewed the draft document and returned its comments to the
Army.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, including this specific site there are no areas subject to the
Subtitle C corrective action authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. Therefore, this
Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
