       
   
   
  
     
         
    
   
     
            
        
              
       
           
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2011 
ALAMO CONTAMINATED Alamo, T ennessee 
Crockett County GROUND WATER 
Site Location: The Alamo Contaminated Ground Water site consists of a plume of contaminated ground water beneath the City of Alamo, Tennessee. The full extent of the ground water plume has not been determined. Site History: In 1988, solvent contamination was discovered in two of the four municipal production wells which supply the city of Alamo with drinking water. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) detected included tetrachloroethene (PCE) and trichloroethene (TCE) above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs). Subsequent investigations conducted by both the state and EPA have discovered multiple potential sources of VOC contamination in the area. One potential source, Volunteer Circuits, manufactured printed circuit boards for the electronics industry from 1973-1975. Additional suspected sources of contamination include newspaper printing and dry cleaners. Site Contamination/Contaminants: VOCs, including TCE, PCE, dichloroethene and 1,1,1 trichloroethane have been detected in ground water in several monitoring wells and the city’s municipal wells. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : All of the potential sources have not been identified and the size of the contaminated ground water plume is unknown. Other private wells and county utility district wells are located within a mile of the known plume area. The contaminated aquifer is the Memphis Sands Aquifer , which is considered a sole source aquifer for this area of Tennessee. Unless the contaminated plume is addressed, the City of Alamo will have to continually treat its well water prior to distribution to the public.   Response Activities (to date): Several investigations have been conducted by EPA and the state. The City of Alamo continues to treat water from the city wells by air stripping prior to distribution. Need for NPL Listing: The State of Tennessee referred the site to EPA because contaminated ground water has contaminated the municipal drinking water wells of the City of Alamo, and because the extent of ground water contamination has not been fully delineated. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated , but are not viable at this time. EPA received a letter from the state supporting listing of the site on the NPL. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxF AQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
