NPL Site Narrative for Alaric Area Ground
Water Plume
 
ALARIC AREA GROUND WATER PLUME
Tampa, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 4, 2000) : The Alaric Area Ground Water Plume (AAGWP) site is an
area of chlorinated solvent ground water contamination in Tampa, Hillsborough County, Florida. The plume
underlies an area of residential, mixed industrial, and commercial use in the vicinity of the Alaric, Inc.,
facility, which is bound on the west by a wood products business; on the northwest by a pay telephone
refurbishing company; on the east by North 71st Street and a National Priorities List (NPL) site, Helena
Chemical Company (HCC); on the south by a vacant lot owned by HCC; and on the north by a masonry
construction company and a battery recycling and reconditioning company. The site is being placed on
the NPL because of the threat from the ground water plume to the approximately 8,875 individuals within
four miles of the site that use ground water as a source of drinking water. Contaminants of concern in the
ground water plume include chlorinated solvents and related compounds such as tetrachloroethene (also
known as perchloroethene or PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), cis-1,2-dichloroethene (DCE), trans-1,2-DCE,
and vinyl chloride.
 
In 1986, the Hillsborough County Public Health Unit (HCPHU) identified PCE in the Alaric, Inc., potable
well. Additional sampling conducted in the area by the HCPHU revealed elevated concentrations of PCE
and TCE in 23 nearby private potable wells. In December 1986, municipal water lines were extended to
provide potable water to affected or potentially affected residents in the area around the Alaric facility. In
January 1988, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) conducted a site screening investigation
(SSI) in the vicinity of the Alaric facility. PCE and/or TCE were detected in soil gas collected during the SSI
from the Alaric facility and from eight neighboring facilities, including HCC to the northeast and the vacant
lot owned by HCC to the south, Woodcraft Products to the west, and Singleton Battery to the north. PCE
was also detected at low concentrations in a sample from one monitoring well installed at the Alaric facility.
In December 1987 and February 1988, the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (FDER)
conducted a ground water assessment, which again revealed elevated levels of PCE and TCE in the Alaric
supply well and in monitoring wells on the Alaric, HCC, and Woodcraft Products properties. From 1997 to
1998, FDER's successor agency, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) conducted
a contamination assessment at the Alaric facility. PCE and cis-1,2-DCE were detected in subsurface soil
samples collected at or below the ground water table, and PCE and its degradation products, TCE, cis-1,2-
DCE, trans-1,2-DCE, and vinyl chloride, were detected in ground water samples collected from the Alaric
and adjacent properties.
 
Contamination by PCE, TCE, and related compounds has been documented in the surficial aquifer and
Floridan aquifer beneath the Alaric and adjacent facilities. Former operations at the Alaric, Inc., facility
are one suspected source of the ground water contamination; however, data have neither confirmed nor
eliminated Alaric and the adjacent facilities as potential contributors. Four community well systems operate
drinking water wells within a four-mile radius of the AAGWP site. The nearest community wells are located
approximately two miles southeast and north of the site. Twenty-three private residential or business wells
within a four-mile radius of the facility provide drinking water to residents and employees. In all, about
8,875 groundwater users are within a four-mile radius of the AAGWP site. Most of the community wells and
some of the private wells draw water from these aquifers.
 
Status (December 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
