NPL Site Narrative for ALCOA (Point
Comfort)/Lavaca Bay
 
ALCOA (POINT COMFORT)/LAVACA BAY
Point Comfort, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 23, 1993) : The ALCOA/Lavaca Bay site is located in Calhoun County in
southeast Texas along the Gulf of Mexico. The Aluminum Company of America (ALCOA) Point Comfort
plant is located on the shore of Lavaca Bay. The site includes contaminated sediments in the bay and
an associated man-made dredge spoil island located approximately 1,200 feet west of the ALCOA plant.
The dredge spoil island is composed of a 91-acre gypsum lagoon and a dredge spoil area (covering
approximately 50 acres) that includes five lagoons. The ALCOA plant is located in an industrial area
approximately 1.5 miles south of Point Comfort and 4 miles northeast of the City of Port Lavaca.
 
In 1965, ALCOA opened a chlor-alkali production plant that produced chlorine gas and sodium hydroxide
through an electrolytic process that utilized mercury cathodes. The two primary sources of hazardous
substances at the site identified by EPA to date are the gypsum lagoon and the dredge spoil areas. During
the plant's operation, waste water containing mercury was discharged into Lavaca Bay through outfalls
located on the off-shore gypsum disposal lagoon. Dredge spoils contaminated with mercury were disposed
of in several areas on the site. EPA sampled sediments in Lavaca Bay in September 1992, and found
mercury at levels significantly above concentrations in background samples.
 
In 1970, the Texas Water Quality Board (predecessor to the Texas Water Commission), in response
to information received from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Texas Department
of Health (TDH), issued an Emergency Order against ALCOA finding them responsible for the mercury
discharged to the off-shore gypsum lagoon. The order also stated that these discharges contaminated
Lavaca Bay, creating harmful and possibly toxic conditions for humans, animals, and aquatic life. In the
same year, ALCOA restricted the discharge of mercury into Lavaca Bay to concentrations below regulatory
levels. In April 1988, the TDH issued a public warning prohibiting the harvesting of fish and crabs from
portions of Lavaca Bay near the site.
 
Lavaca Bay is an estuary of the Matagorda Bay system and is used for both commercial and recreational
fishing. According to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Lavaca Bay also serves as a habitat for a number
of endangered aquatic and bird species.
 
Status (February 1994) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
