NPL Site Narrative for Algoma Municipal
Landfill
 
ALGOMA MUNICIPAL LANDFILL
Algoma, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Algoma Municipal Landfill covers approximately 7.5 acres
in Kewanee County about 2 miles west of Algoma, Wisconsin. The City of Algoma owns the landfill and
operated it in 1969-83. In 1970, the landfill received a license from the State to accept municipal refuse.
When the landfill closed in 1983, the city covered it with 2 feet of clay and 6 inches of topsoil.
 
Most of the waste accepted at the landfill was municipal refuse. However, an estimated 210 drums of
finishing materials, including polyvinyl acetate, lacquer thinner, methanol, silicate, pigments, and paint
primer, were disposed of at the landfill, according to EPA.
 
In August 1984, EPA detected organic chemicals and metals, including benzene, methyl ethyl ketone,
xylenes, arsenic, and cadmium, in on-site monitoring wells.
 
The landfill, which had no liner, is underlain by a sand and gravel aquifer. Below is the Niagara dolomite
aquifer. The two aquifers are hydraulically connected so that water can move between them. City of
Algoma wells draw on the Niagara dolomite aquifer, and rural wells draw from both aquifers. An estimated
5,000 people depend on wells within 3 miles of the site for drinking water.
 
The site is within 3 miles of Lake Michigan. Krohn's Lake, which is used for recreational activities, is less
than 1 mile away.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA has identified a number of site owners/operators, waste generators, and
haulers in its search for individuals and companies potentially responsible for wastes associated with the
site.
 
EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1987 includes a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
