NPL Site Narrative for Allied Paper, Inc./
Portage Creek/Kalamazoo River
 
ALLIED PAPER, INC./PORTAGE CREEK/KALAMAZOO RIVER
Kalamazoo, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (May 5, 1989) : The Allied Paper, Inc./Portage Creek/Kalamazoo River Site
involves PCB contamination of (1) an Allied Paper, Inc., property in Kalamazoo, Kalamazoo County,
Michigan, (2) a 3-mile stretch of Portage Creek from Kalamazoo to where the creek meets the Kalamazoo
River, and (3) a 35-mile stretch of the Kalamazoo River.
 
Allied Paper, Inc., has operated paper mills on a 80-acre property at 2030 Portage Road in Kalamazoo
since 1925. The company, a subsidiary of SCM Corp., recycled and deinked paper, including carbonless
copy papers, which contained 3.4 percent by weight of PCBs, from 1957 to 1971.
 
In 1986, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources (MDNR) detected PCBs in several places in the
80-mile stretch of the Kalamazoo River between Kalamazoo and Lake Michigan. Contamination is primarily
in the sediments, although the water column and fish are also contaminated. According to MDNR, the
contamination begins at the point were Allied's Bryant Mill Pond discharges to Portage Creek.
 
MDNR tests conducted in October 1985 also found PCBs (Aroclor 1242 and 1254) in monitoring wells
around a landfill on the Allied property, two seeps from a sludge disposal area, and a discharge to Portage
Creek. An estimated 142,000 people obtain drinking water from public wells within 3 miles of the site, the
nearest 1.1 miles from the site. No alternate unthreatened sources of water are now available.
 
In 1977, the Michigan Department of Public Health issued an advisory warning against eating fish from the
river because they were contaminated with PCBs. In 1984, MDNR began a long-term project to clean up
the river after it was listed in the Michigan Environmental Response Act. MDNR has conducted extensive
sampling to determine the extent of contamination.
 
On December 2, 1987, the State filed a complaint under CERCLA Sections 107 and 113, the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act, and three Michigan laws. The complaint called for Allied Paper and SCM Corp. to stop the release
of hazardous substances into the environment and pay cleanup costs. In response, the companies have
undertaken studies of the extent of the PCB contamination, the quantities of PCBs in Bryant Mill Pond, and
possible remedial actions.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : MDNR is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
