 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** April 2006 
ALTERNATE ENERGY RESOURCES Augusta, Georgia 
              Richmond County 12th Congressional District 
 
à Site Location/Size: 
 The Alternate Energy Resources (AER) property is a 2.64-acre abandoned property located at 2936 Walden Drive in Augusta, Richmond County, Georgia. From 1975 to 2000, AER operated as a commercial hazardous waste storage and treatment facility. 
 
´ Site History: 
 AER began operations in early 1975, when AER purchased th e Nimmons Oil Company property. AER’s waste treatment processes included: blending high-BTU hazardous waste to be used as fuel in off-site industrial boilers and furnaces; recycling  hazardous waste solvents by distillation; and treating used oils, hazardous and non-hazardous wa stewater, and non-hazardous coolants. AER filed for bankruptcy on December 13, 2000. 
  
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 The potential sources of site contamination include: soil contamin ation that is present at significantly elevated concentration s; a 3,000 gallon toluene and heptane spill; a 500-gallon release from a rainwater collection basin; a 13,191 gallon waste oil, inks , and oil processing residues spill; and a 70,000 gallon former unlined surf ace impoundment. Contaminants of concern associated with activities at the AER facility include trichloroethene (TCE) and tetrachlorethene (PCE). TCE and PCE were detected in ground water samples and soil samples at concentrations si gnificantly above background concentrations. 
 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
 AER was evaluated based on the ground water migration pathwa y. A ground water plume, believed to be caused by AER operations, impacted several domestic drinki ng water wells located within the Hollywood subdivision, between 0.5 mile and one m ile southeast of the AER property. As a result of the contamination,  the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (GAEPD) issued a  Consent Order to AER requiring the affected domestic drinking wa ter wells be connected to the Augusta Utilities Department (AUD ) municipal water supply. In May 1987, the majority of the affected domestic private we lls were connected to the AUD municipal wa ter supply.                                       
 A TCE- and a PCE-contaminated ground water plume is migrating toward the AUD muni cipal water supply system wells located within 2 to 4 miles of the AER property. Approximately 13, 798 people obtain potable water from the AUD system, and 102 people obtain potable water from private drinking water wells that have a potential to be contaminated from the ground water plume. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
 GAEPD has issued six Consent Orders to AER addressing viola tions and requesting corrective actions.  In August 2004, GAEPD completed a Preliminary Assessment/Site Inspection report for th e AER property. On May 4, 2001, GAEPD inspected the AER property and reported that 499 drums, waste tanks, incompatible products, and liquids in  a secondary containment system remaine d onsite. On August 17, 2001, AER was listed on the State of Georgi a Hazardous Sites Inventory. From February to August 2002, Georgia’s Hazardous Site Response Program (HSRP) contractor removed the drums from the property, removed residual waste from tanks, removed accumulated precipitation from the containment systems, removed chemicals from an onsite laboratory, decontaminated and removed tanks and associated piping for off-site  disposal, decontaminated secondary containment structures f or unpermitted units, and removed an abandoned tanker truck from the property.
 
  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
