 
   
   
  
   
    
   
   
    
  
   
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2009 
AMCAST INDUSTRIAL CORPORATION Cedarburg, Wisconsin Ozaukee County 
Site Location: Amcast Industrial Corporation is located at N39 W 5789 Hamilton Road, Cedarburg, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin. Site History: A former aluminum die-casting facility operated in Ce darburg, Wisconsin, from 1939 through 2004.  In the 1970s, the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR ) became aware of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) contamination in sediments in Cedar Creek.  The die- casting operation previously used PCB containing hydraulic fluids, and cutting and grinding oils in their processes. Amcast Industrial Corporation filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2004. The facility is closed and vacant. Site Contamination/Contaminants: PCBs have been reported in soils, in municipal storm sewers, in a waste disposal area on the property, and in a nearby municipal park pond adjacent to the former aluminum die-casting facility. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: In 1991, WDNR closed the park pond as a fishery because the fish  were also contaminated with PCBs.  PCBs have also been reported in residential soils adjacent to the former aluminum die-casting facility.  Response Activities (to date): A study is being conducted to determine future response activities at the site. Need for NPL Listing: The State of Wisconsin referred the site to EPA because PCBs have been detected in residential soils and in a closed fishery. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluate d, but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
