       
    
                 
           
 
   
        
             
             
      
      
      
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** January 2018 
AMERICAN CREOSOTE DE RIDDER DeRidder, Louisiana 
Beauregard Parish 
Site Location:The American Creosote DeRidder site is a 55 -acre tract of land owned by Central Manufacturing Company (CMC) located south of the city of DeRidder, Beauregard Parish, Louisiana. 
Site History: Historical timber treatment operations at the American Creosote DeRidder site have resulted in contamination by creosote related compounds. The Shreveport Creosoting Company operated a creosote timber treatment facility from the early 1920s to approximately 1945 on a parcel of land south of DeRidder, creosote operations were relocated from this tract of land in the mid-1940s, although other wood treatment procedures are reported to have continued until approximately 1957. From 1957 to 1992 the property remained dormant until its purchase by CMC in September 1992. 
Site Contamination/Contaminants: Soil, sediment and surface water are contaminated with waste from previous timber treatment activities including liquid pitch oil, tar oil and coal tar solutions. Wastes were collected in on- site concrete vats and pits. Soil, sediment and surface water at the site include numerous polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPHs), and metals. A drip area, creosote processing basin area, waste pit and washout area were located on -site, and used during operations in the wood preserving pressure treatment process. 
Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : Contamination has migrated from the former facility to the underlying ground water, adjacent wetlands, stream beds and nearby surface waters. 
Response Activities (to date): No remediation or response activities have taken place. 
Need for NPL Listing: The state of Louisiana referred the site to the EPA. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Louisiana. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subseque nt FR notices] For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
