NPL Site Narrative for American Lake
Gardens/McChord AFB
 
AMERICAN LAKE GARDENS/MCCHORD AFB
Tacoma, Washington
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : In January 1983, a resident of American Lake Gardens in
Tacoma, Washington, complained to EPA about family health problems, which she blamed on bad drinking
water. She claimed that contamination resulting from disposal practices at McChord Air Force Base,
which borders her property on three sides, was polluting her wells. EPA and the Tacoma-Pierce County
Health Department found high levels of iron, trichloroethylene, and 1,2-transdichloroethylene in her wells.
Subsequent sampling identified several more contaminated wells nearby. In all, 20 of the 57 wells in
American Lake Gardens were tested. The Health Department advised owners of several wells serving
about 25 people to use bottled water.
 
Because of the discovery of this well contamination, plus the contamination of two large public wells
adjacent to another part of McChord, the Air Force accelerated its Installation Restoration Program at the
base. As part of this effort, the Air Force has sampled existing wells on-site, drilled a number of monitoring
wells, and reviewed records of disposal practices and spills on the base. However, the information covering
the area adjacent to American Lake Gardens is incomplete. EPA is now drilling four monitoring wells along
the boundary of the most contaminated property and will drill up to six additional wells to determine the
extent of contamination and to locate the source. The Air Force has agreed to drill at least two monitoring
wells on the base to help locate the source and to continue its general investigation of ground water
contamination.
 
Status (June 1984) : EPA drilled and sampled eight monitoring wells in American Lake Gardens and
sampled three monitoring wells constructed by the Air Force on adjacent property. The lab results
showed contamination of the American Lake Gardens wells to be coming from McChord Air Force Base.
Accordingly, on March 1, 1984, EPA turned the site investigation over to the Air Force. The Air Force
has agreed to perform a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The Air Force is now providing
bottled water to American Lake Gardens' residents dependent on contaminated wells. In addition, the
Air Force recently sampled approximately 20 wells in the subdivision and constructed several additional
monitoring wells on the McChord Air Force Base.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
