NPL Site Narrative for American Brass
 
AMERICAN BRASS
Headland, Alabama
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (January 1999) : American Brass, Inc. is located on State Highway 134 near
Headland, Henry County, Alabama. American Brass, Inc. was a secondary brass facility (SIC 3341) that
operated on a 140-acre site surrounded by agricultural land from 1977 until 1992. The process at American
Brass, Inc. was as follows: Brass- and copper-bearing scrap material were charged into the rotary furnaces
and melted. Alloying and fluxing agents were added to obtain a spec alloy. The metal was cast into ingot
form and the remaining slag was taken for further processing. The ingots were allowed to cool. The slag
was processed through the crusher and then into the ball mill. Brass particles were recovered from the
crushed slag and reprocessed in the furnace. The slag was then sent to storage bins. Fume from the
furnaces and particulate emissions from the crusher and ballmill were controlled by two baghouses. The
baghouse dust was collected and sold as a finished product. Approximately 150,000 tons of heavy metal-
contaminated furnace waste, ball mill residues, and furnace slag were stockpiled in the facility at various
areas on the ground and in a large uncontrolled stockpile approximately one-third mile southeast of the
facility.
 
On February 22, 1996, the Alabama Department of Environmental Management (ADEM) conducted a
Site Investigation at American Brass, Inc. and collected aqueous samples and sediment samples from
Dunham Creek, Cedar Creek, and the breach in the berm around the ball mill stockpile, which drains
into a tributary to Cedar Creek. Aqueous samples collected in Dunham Creek show a release of barium;
the sediment samples indicate a release of barium, chromium, copper, nickel, lead, and zinc. Aqueous
samples collected from Cedar Creek indicate a release of barium; the sediment samples indicate a release
of barium, chromium, and zinc. Aqueous samples collected below the breach in the berm show a release
of barium, copper, lead, and zinc; the sediment samples show a release of barium, chromium, copper,
nickel, lead, and zinc.
 
In April 1996, as part of EPA Region 4's removal assessment at this site, EPA's START contractor
conducted an additional site investigation and collected surface soil, ground water, and waste samples
to determine preliminary site conditions. Analytical results indicated elevated levels of lead in samples
collected in the pond sediment and in the ball mill residue stockpile. ADEM had a representative on site to
collect split samples and additional samples.
 
In August 1996, EPA's START contractor conducted another site investigation. During the investigation 27
soil samples were collected in order to determine the extent of contamination in the soil surrounding the
facility. Analyses of the samples indicated elevated levels up to 1,300 parts per million (ppm).
 
Due to site conditions, and the potential threat to human health and the environment, EPA submitted an
Action Memorandum requesting removal action. EPA selected an ERCS Contractor to perform the removal
activities on site.
 
Removal activities were to mitigate the soil contamination in excess of 1,500 ppm, decontaminate the
site structures and machinery, and consolidate the waste with the on-site stockpile of ball mill residue for
subsequent encapsulation with a high-density polyethylene (HDPE) liner. These activities were concluded
on May 7, 1997.
 
A second emergency removal action commenced in October 1998, and was completed in March, 1999,to
remove and properly dispose of the material in the ball mill residue pile.
 
Status (May 1999) : During the summer of 1999, EPA will be conducting the RI/FS, which includes
community relations activities.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
