NPL Site Narrative for American Crossarm
& Conduit Co.
 
AMERICAN CROSSARM & CONDUIT CO.
Chehalis, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : American Crossarm & Conduit Co. formerly operated on a 16-
acre site within the city limits of Chehalis, Lewis County, Washington, close to several local residences and
businesses. The Chehalis River is about 1 mile to the southwest, and a tributary, Dillenbaugh Creek, flows
past the site into the river. Two fresh water wetlands are within 1 mile of the site.
 
American Crossarm operated during 1948-83, primarily treating and selling laminated utility pole
crossarms. The wood treatment process used pentachlorophenol (PCP) and creosote. Waste waters were
discharged into an unlined surface impoundment.
 
Shallow ground water is contaminated with PCP, according to tests conducted by American Crossarm in
1984. Deeper ground water within 3 miles of the site provides drinking water to an estimated 1,100 people.
 
In February 1986, the company submitted a closure plan for the impoundment, which the Washington
Department of Ecology (WDOE) rejected. On November 6, 1986, WDOE issued an order requiring the
company to stop discharging waste water to the sewer, investigate the integrity of all tanks and sumps, and
install secondary containment structures around all tanks and sumps.
 
On November 24, 1986, a flood of the Chehalis River caused oil and PCP to be released from the site.
About 15 homes, 4 businesses, the surrounding property, Dillenbaugh Creek, and Chehalis River were
contaminated with PCP, according to tests conducted by WDOE. The river is used for recreational
activities and irrigation within 3 miles of the site. Using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA cleaned
city streets, homes, businesses, and the creek. During these actions, EPA recovered and contained
contaminated debris and soil, and emptied various industrial storage tanks.
 
The company filed for bankruptcy, which was later dismissed. The company appealed, and the U.S. District
Court of Appeals affirmed the dismissal in December 1987.
 
The facility is being proposed for the NPL because it is classified as a "protective filer" under Subtitle
C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and so is not subject to Subtitle C corrective action
authorities.
 
Status (February 1989) : In August 1988, EPA conducted a trial burn using an on-site incinerator. After
results indicated levels of combustion well within established guidelines, EPA began to incinerate the
contaminated materials stored on-site. Incineration was completed in January 1989.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
