NPL Site Narrative for American Creosote
Works, Inc. (Jackson Plant)
 
AMERICAN CREOSOTE WORKS, INC. (JACKSON PLANT)
Jackson, Tennessee
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The American Creosote Works, Inc., Site is a 60-acre wood-
preserving facility in Jackson, Madison County, Tennessee. From 1930 to 1981, it used creosote and
pentachlorophenol (PCP) in its operations. At one time, this facility consisted of four large waste water
lagoons, two sand filters, four treatment tanks, two 20,000-gallon tanks, various piles, and drip yards.
Numerous spills also occurred on the site. The wood-treatment process causes water pollution through
two routes--the treatment process itself and run-off from the site. In the 1970s, the company constructed
a berm to control run-off and installed a new waste water treatment system. In June 1983, EPA approved
$860,000 in CERCLA emergency funds to dewater the site, remove and bury sludge, and cap certain
areas with clay.
 
This site was originally proposed for listing under the name "American Creosote Works, Inc."
 
Analyses conducted by EPA indicate that soil and shallow ground water are contaminated with creosote
and PCP constituents. The facility is located less than 0.25 mile from the South Fork of the Forked Deer
River, where shallow ground water is believed to discharge. Wetlands lying along both sides of the river
support a large variety of wildlife species. Several public and private wells are located within 3 miles of the
site. A well field for the City of Jackson (population 49,000) lies approximately 1.5 miles east of the site.
 
The plant received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the company filed Part A of a permit application.
 
American Creosote is under reorganization in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court.
 
Status (January 1986) : In November 1985, EPA began to perform a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : This site is being placed on the NPL because it satisfies a component of EPA's
NPL/RCRA policy: the owner has demonstrated inability to finance appropriate remedial action by invoking
bankruptcy laws.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
