NPL Site Narrative for American Anodco,
Inc.
 
AMERICAN ANODCO, INC.
Ionia, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The American Anodco, Inc., Site covers approximately 8 acres
in Ionia, Ionia County, Michigan. The company has cleaned, brightened, anodized, and sealed aluminum
parts for the automotive industry on the site since 1962 and has owned the property since then. The site is
in a small industrial park bordering a residential area.
 
The company disposes of process and cooling water in a 7-foot-deep unlined seepage lagoon measuring
207 feet by 60 feet. The lagoon holds an estimated 2,400 cubic yards of waste. According to analyses
conducted by EPA, the water placed in the lagoon contains nitric acid and chromium.
 
The potential for ground water contamination is high because the subsurface consists of highly permeable
glacial drift, mainly sand and gravel, and because wastes can easily enter ground water from the unlined
lagoon. The glacial drift aquifer underlying American Anodco supplies public and private wells within 3
miles of the site which serve over 10,000 people.
 
Grand River, which is within 3 miles of the site, is used for fishing and recreation.
 
The site is not completely fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact
with hazardous substances.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : In August 1986, American Anodco detected aluminum, chromium, copper, and
nickel in on-site monitoring wells.
 
Under an Administrative Order on Consent with the State signed on October 30, 1987, American
Anodco agreed to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The work is scheduled to be
completed late in 1989.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
