NPL Site Narrative for American Creosote
Works, Inc. (Winnfield Plant)
 
AMERICAN CREOSOTE WORKS, INC. (WINNFIELD PLANT)
Winnfield, Louisiana
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 7, 1992) : The American Creosote Works, Inc., site covers 34 acres at
1006 Front Street in a primarily residential area of Winnfield, Winn Parish, Louisiana. The site began wood-
treating operations in 1901 as Bodeau Lumber Co. In 1910, Bodeau Lumber sold 22 acres to Louisiana
Creosoting Co., which in 1938 sold this land to American Creosote Works of Louisiana, Inc. American
Creosote Works, Inc., acquired the property in 1950, along with an additional 12 acres. In 1977, American
Creosote Works was bought by Dickson Lumber Co. Dickson was later declared bankrupt, and the city
seized the property for taxes. Stallworth Timber purchased the property in 1980, refurbished the plant,
and operated it until 1985. After State inspections revealed a number of hazardous conditions (including
creosote spillage and abandoned pits and containers), the State issued a letter of warning and then a
Compliance Order on January 22, 1985. Stallworth failed to comply with the order and abandoned the
facility.
 
Various buildings and equipment remain on-site. All are deteriorating and appear unstable. Historical aerial
photographs indicate that the facility used five unlined pits to receive liquid wastes. Four were located east
of the process area, and one sludge pit was within the main process area. The northern portion of the
plant was used for wood-treating operations and creosote storage, and the southern portion for storage of
treated and untreated wood.
 
An EPA site inspection in March 1987 identified threats to public health and the environment due to soil
and surface water contamination. Contaminants included polychlorinated dibenzodioxins, polychlorinated
dibenzofurans, and various carcinogenic and mutagenic polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons. Since
the site was not fenced and local residents, including school children, crossed the site, EPA issued an
administrative order to Stallworth requiring fencing and a warning sign. The fence was completed in July
1988. In March and July 1988, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to prevent the oils and sludges that
were seeping out of the storage tanks from flowing through site drainage ditches to Creosote Branch 3,000
feet downstream.
 
EPA tests during 1987-88 indicated soil contamination in the pit area, the on-site drainage pathway,
the process area, and residential properties bordering the site. Sediment samples taken in Creosote
Branch along the north border and 3 miles downstream of the facility also contained polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons, which are constituents of creosote. Among on-site contaminants detected are
pentachlorophenol, naphthalene, benzo(a)pyrene, lead, zinc, anthracene, acenaphthene, chrysene,
fluoranthene, and fluorene. Three on-site drainage ditches receive surface water runoff from the facility.
The ditches are lined with a tar-like substance, and EPA observed subterranean leaching of a creosote-
like material. All three ditches empty into Creosote Branch, a fresh water wetland. Creosote Branch and
Port de Luce Creek are used for recreational fishing. An estimated 5,700 persons live within 1 mile of the
facility.
 
Status (October 1992) : EPA has completed a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. A Record of
Decision documenting the alternative selected is expected shortly.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
