NPL Site Narrative for American Creosote
Works, Inc.
 
AMERICAN CREOSOTE WORKS, INC.
Louisville, Mississippi
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 14, 2001) : The American Creosote Works, Inc., site encompasses the
property of a former timber processing and wood preserving facility, approximately 120 acres in size,
located at the corner of Railroad Avenue and Baremore Street in Louisville, Winston County, Mississippi.
The former facility operated from 1912 until 1998. The site is being proposed to the NPL based on
evidence of shallow ground water contamination beneath the former facility and contamination of Railroad
Lake by creosote constituents, including naphthalene, dibenzofuran, fluorene, fluoranthene, chrysene,
2-methyl naphthalene, anthracene, phenanthrene, carbazole, pyrene, acenaphthene, phenol, and other
substances associated with wood preserving processes. Ground water is used locally as a potable water
supply source, and Railroad Lake was formerly used by local residents for recreation and fishing.
 
American Creosote Works, Inc., operations included bark removal, wood preserving, and product
storage. Creosote was the primary preservative used in the process; however, the facility also used
pentachlorophenol from 1985 to 1988. According to the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality
(MDEQ), the facility was cited for several violations throughout its history. In 1984, the Mississippi
Bureau of Pollution Control (MBPC) inspected the facility, discovered two uncontrolled waste lagoons
containing creosote, and requested assistance from EPA to address these areas. EPA subsequently
oversaw the excavation of the lagoon wastes as well as wastes contained in a previously identified surface
impoundment. Approximately 60,000 cubic yards of excavated creosote waste was solidified with cement
kiln dust, placed into a storage cell on top of approximately 5 feet of clay, and capped. During a second
removal action performed in 1999, EPA oversaw the stabilization of 5,000 cubic yards of creosote waste
contained in overflowing tanks, solidified the waste, and placed it in a second storage cell. Soil sampling
during a 1999 site inspection revealed residual contamination in the formerly excavated areas.
 
Surface water runoff from the property flows into two watersheds. Runoff flows both into Railroad Lake,
located on the facility property, and into drainage ditches which empty into an unnamed, intermittent
tributary of Hughes Creek. Hughes Creek, which is intermittent in the vicinity of the site, flows south and
intersects Tallahaga Creek. Creosote constituents have been detected at elevated concentrations in the
sediments of Railroad Lake and in the intermittent segment of Hughes Creek. Railroad Lake is a fishery
and a former recreational area. In recent years, however, visible creosote contamination has reportedly
caused local residents to refrain from using the Lake. Land use in the area surrounding the American
Creosote Works, Inc., facility is both industrial and residential.
 
Elevated levels of creosote-related hazardous substances also have been detected in ground water
collected by EPA from the Wilcox aquifer beneath the site. Five public drinking water wells operated by
the City of Louisville draw water from the Wilcox aquifer and are located within 1/2 mile of the facility in the
direction of ground water flow. An additional 17 private wells and one irrigation well draw water from the
aquifer and are located within 4 miles of the facility.
 
Status (September 2001) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
