NPL Site Narrative for Amoco Chemicals
Corp. (Joliet Landfill)
 
AMOCO CHEMICALS CORP. (JOLIET LANDFILL)
Joliet, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Amoco Chemicals Corp. manufactures chemicals on a 75-
acre property approximately 6 miles southwest of Joliet, Will County, Illinois. According to information
the company provided to EPA, as required by Section 103(c) of CERCLA, about 5 million cubic feet of
wastes, including organics, inorganics, heavy metals, acids, and mixed municipal refuse, were disposed
of in a 6-acre landfill on the property during 1958-72. Some ignitable wastes and organic acid residues
were disposed of in drums in the landfill. In 1976, Amoco covered the landfill with 2 feet of compacted clay
and seeded it with perennial grasses. A leachate collection system was installed under a permit from the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA). The leachate is treated in Amoco's waste water treatment
plant before it is discharged to Des Plaines River. The landfill was officially closed in February 1978. Tests
conducted by Amoco in 1982 and IEPA in 1974 indicate that monitoring wells downgradient of the site are
contaminated with benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and para-, meta-, and ortho-xylene. A shallow aquifer
underlies the site. Approximately 1,100 persons obtain drinking water from private wells drilled into the
aquifer within 3 miles of the site.
 
According to IEPA, leachate from the old landfill flows into an inlet to the adjacent Des Plaines River. IEPA
tests detected phenol, cadmium, copper, lead, and manganese in the river, which is used for recreational
activities. The site is open to the river, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact
with hazardous substances.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : IEPA and Amoco are investigating various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
