NPL Site Narrative for AMP, Inc. (Glen
Rock Facility)
 
AMP, INC. (GLEN ROCK FACILITY)
Glen Rock, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : AMP, Inc., has owned and operated a 20-acre site on Old Route
11, Susquehanna Trail Road, in Glen Rock, York County, Pennsylvania, since the early 1950s. The area
is rural. The site involves two operations: a materials development laboratory that conducts research on
contact adhesives and lubricants and a plastics division that manufactures injection mold plastics and
polyester used in undercarpet cable.
 
In September 1982, 5-7 gallons of chlorinated organic solvents were spilled around the cement storage
pad used by both the production and research operations, according to the company. The solvents stored
on this pad included 1,1,2-trichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethylene, 1,1-dichloroethane, and chloroform.
 
In 1984, a consultant to AMP detected elevated levels of these compounds in ground water and surface
water downgradient of the AMP facility. An estimated 4,700 people obtain drinking water from public and
private wells and springs in the Wissahickon Formation within 3 miles of the site. The consultant also
detected solvents in a spring discharging to Larkin Pond 550 feet from the site. The creek is used for
recreational activities. A wetland is adjacent to Larkin Pond.
 
AMP is pumping one of its wells to form a cone of depression in an attempt to prevent the contaminants
from migrating off-site and has installed a stripping tower to remove the solvents from wells of a nearby
trailer park. AMP is analyzing monitoring wells quarterly and studying subsurface conditions at the site.
 
This facility obtained Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when it filed a Notification of Hazardous Waste Activity and Part A of a permit application to treat,
store, or dispose of hazardous waste. Later it withdrew its Part A and converted to generator-only status
with EPA or State approval. Hence, it satisfies a component of EPA's NPL/RCRA policy.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : On March 1, 1989, EPA entered into a RCRA Section 3008 (h) corrective action
Consent Order with AMP. Under the order, AMP will investigate the type and extent of contamination at the
site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
