NPL Site Narrative for Andrews Air Force
Base
 
ANDREWS AIR FORCE BASE
Camp Springs, Maryland
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 1998) : Andrews Air Force Base (AAFB) is an active U.S. Department
of Defense facility that occupies about 4,360 acres of land in Camp Springs, Prince George's County,
Maryland, about 5 miles southeast of Washington, DC. AAFB was established as the Camp Springs Army
Air Field in 1942 and became AAFB in 1947. AAFB serves as the headquarters of the 89th Air Wing and
is host to about 50 tenant units. AAFB supports worldwide airlift support operations for the President of the
United States and other high-ranking domestic and foreign dignitaries, and supports the flight operations of
more than 100 aircraft.
 
Investigations have revealed the presence of numerous hazardous substances on site. These
substances include lead, mercury, chromium, and cadmium; volatile organic compounds, such as
tetrachloroethene; semivolatile organic compounds, predominantly polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
such as acenaphthene, benzo(a)pyrene, and fluoranthene; and polychlorinated biphenyls.
 
The five sources at AAFB evaluated in the documentation record include two fire training areas, a sludge
disposal area, a landfill, and two contiguous landfills. These sources are located within the watershed of
Piscataway Creek, which discharges into the Potomac River beyond the 15-mile target distance limit.
 
Lead and numerous semivolatile organic compounds have been detected at significantly elevated
concentrations in Piscataway Creek. Lead has been documented as being present in Piscataway Creek at
concentrations above the Ambient Water Quality Criteria. Surface water migration pathway targets include
wetlands, a fishery in Piscataway Creek downstream of AAFB, migratory runs of anadromous fish, and an
area of critical state concern.
 
Status (May 1999) : EPA and the Maryland Department of the Environment are continuing to work with the
U.S. Air Force to investigate and clean up the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
