NPL Site Narrative for Annapolis Lead
Mine
 
ANNAPOLIS LEAD MINE
Annapolis, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (March 8, 2004) : The Annapolis Lead Mine (ALM) is an inactive lead mine
located approximately 1 mile east and 3/8 mile north of Annapolis, Iron County, Missouri. The total area of
the former mine facility is approximately 50 acres. Lead-bearing ore was mined from ALM sporadically from
approximately 1920 through 1940. According to production figures for a portion of the mine's operational
history, over 1 million tons of mining wastes were generated. The mining wastes, composed of overburden
and milling residue, contain heavy metals. The primary metals of concern are lead, cadmium, zinc, and
arsenic. The site is being proposed to the NPL because elevated levels of heavy metals, particularly
lead, have been found throughout the site. In addition, elevated concentrations of site-related hazardous
substances have been detected in surface water bodies located downstream from the site and pose a
threat to recreational fisheries and wetlands in the area.
 
The former mining facility is composed of derelict buildings used during the mining operation, most of
which only have foundations remaining. One structure, however, was used as a single family residence.
The dominant feature on the site is a chat/tailings pile that occupies approximately 10 acres in the southern
portion of the former mining facility. The material in the pile is highly erodible, which has resulted in steep-
sided features with an outwash area that fans westward to Sutton Branch Creek. The property is divided
among several landowners.
 
Previous sampling activities at the ALM site have included efforts by the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources, an EPA-lead Site Investigation (SI) and Expanded Site Investigation (ESI), and an emergency
response (resulting from the occurrence of high blood lead levels in children who have since been
relocated from the site). The analytical results associated with these sampling activities indicated the
presence of heavy metals in the on-site ground water, surface water, sediment, and surface soil. Dust and
wipe samples were also collected within the on-site residence and were found to have lead concentrations
up to 0.625 micrograms per square centimeter (µg/cm2) and 1,170 mg/kg, respectively.
 
Four lead-contaminated source areas were delineated for removal assessment purposes: the heavily
eroded chat/tailings waste pile, the outwash area of the chat/tailings waste pile, the former mining
operations area, and the mill slime pond. EPA analytical results have identified heavy metals at all
four delineated source areas. Elevated levels of metals, particularly lead, were found throughout the
site, with the highest concentration at 20,000 mg/kg in surface soils adjacent to the onsite residence.
Samples collected at the chat/tailings pile during the EPA SI in April 1996 revealed lead and cadmium
concentrations as high as 2,570 mg/kg and 4.67 mg/kg, respectively. Elevated levels of arsenic, cadmium,
lead, and zinc were also found during the ESI sampling activity in the surface waters of Sutton Branch
Creek and Big Creek. Lead was found as high as 2,600 mg/kg in sediment samples at the chat/tailings pile
outfall and as high as 1,700 mg/kg at the confluence of Sutton Branch Creek and Big Creek (designated
wetland area), located about 0.75 miles downstream of the site.
 
Big Creek is a known fishery, and wetlands have been identified at the confluence of Sutton Branch
and Big Creek. Soil contamination poses a threat to human health because of the lack of vegetation on
exposed contamination, the presence of residents on the site, a lack of access restriction, and use of the
site for recreation. Currently, a minimal threat exists for site ground water. None of the domestic wells
sampled within a 1-mile radius had concentrations exceeding the designated Maximum Contaminant
Levels (MCLs).
 
Status (July 2004) : A removal action was initiated at the Annapolis Lead Mine site. The removal action
will stabilize and cover the abandoned tailings pile which is migrating into Big Creek via Sutton Branch. At
the current time, two temporary settling basins have been constructed between the tailings pile and Sutton
Branch to establish a barrier between the tailings and Sutton Branch.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
