NPL Site Narrative for Anniston Army
Depot (Southeast Industrial Area)
 
ANNISTON ARMY DEPOT (SOUTHEAST INDUSTRIAL AREA)
Anniston, Alabama
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Anniston Ordnance Depot, which occupies approximately 30
square miles in Anniston, Calhoun County, Alabama, was officially designated as an ammunition storage
area on October 14, 1941. Over the years, operations were expanded to include the overhauling and
repairing of combat vehicles and artillery equipment. The facility is currently referred to as the Anniston
Army Depot (ANAD).
 
This NPL site consists of six different disposal operations covering 600 acres in and adjacent to the
Southeast Industrial/Vehicle Rebuild Area. The six disposal operations were combined to form this NPL
site. Five are waste disposal pits or lagoons containing liquid chemical and industrial wastes contaminated
with heavy metals and chlorinated organic solvents. At the sixth location, drums containing calcium
hypochlorite (bleaching powder) were buried.
 
According to analyses reported by the Army in 1982, metals and chlorinated solvents were present in
the ground water beneath the ANAD Southeast Industrial Area. Ground water is the source of drinking
water for Calhoun County residents. The hydrogeology of Calhoun County is very complex and requires
further studies to define possible aquifer interconnections. The highly fractured bedrock apparently is the
source rock for Coldwater Spring, which supplies private and public water. The spring may be connected
via fractures to contaminated ground water at the ANAD site. The Anniston municipal water supply system
provides drinking water for an estimated 39,000 people.
 
ANAD is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search), Phase II (preliminary survey), and Phase
III (assessment of remedial action alternatives). Two portions of the site (encompassing approximately
5 acres) have been closed under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
Wastes and contaminated soils from those two areas were excavated and removed to a permitted facility.
 
Status (April 1987) : EPA is reviewing an Army study of ground water beneath 31 RCRA and CERCLA
solid waste management units at ANAD, including the Southeast Industrial Area. The Army is conducting
an Endangerment Assessment that will include a summary of all previous activities.
 
Status (March 13, 1989) : The Army installed a system to treat and recover contaminated ground water
and has operated it since December 1988.
 
This site was reproposed on July 22, 1987 to be consistent with EPA's proposed policy for placing on the
NPL sites located on Federally owned or operated facilities subject to the corrective action authorities
of RCRA Subtitle C. EPA solicited comments on the Hazard Ranking System score for the site, which
includes areas subject to RCRA Subtitle C corrective action authorities. EPA has finalized the NPL/RCRA
policy for Federal facility sites and is placing this site on the NPL under the policy.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
