NPL Site Narrative for Anodyne, Inc.
 
ANODYNE, INC.
North Miami Beach, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Anodyne, Inc., Site covers less than 1 acre in the Sunshine
State Industrial Park in North Miami Beach, Dade County, Florida. The building that now occupies the site
is divided into two sections. The northern section is occupied by a furniture manufacturer, Mr. Furniture.
The southern section is occupied by United Parcel Service. The entire site is owned by 745 Property
Investments of Boston, Massachusetts.
 
From the early 1960s until 1975, Anodyne, Inc., produced lithographs and silk screen prints on the site.
Anodyne reportedly disposed of wastes in an injection well near the north end of the building before 1973,
when the company connected to the Myrtle Grove Sewerage System. In a 1973 inspection, Dade County
discovered that the waste was being dumped directly onto the ground. In 1986, EPA detected elevated
levels of chromium in on-site soil and ground water and PCB-1260 in on-site soil.
 
The Biscayne Aquifer, which EPA has designated as a sole source aquifer under the Safe Drinking Water
Act, is directly beneath the site. A layer of quartz sand overlies the limestone aquifer; both formations have
very high horizontal and vertical permeabilities. These conditions facilitate the movement of contaminants
into ground water, as well as movement of contaminated ground water. The W. A. Oeffler and Westside
Well Fields are within 3 miles of the site. They provide drinking water to approximately 148,000 people.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : EPA has conducted a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site. Several of them have met with EPA regarding a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
Since December 1988, Hercules, Inc., has occupied the southern section of the building.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
