NPL Site Narrative for Applied
Environmental Services
 
APPLIED ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
Glenwood Landing, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Applied Environmental Services (AES) Site covers 3.7
acres in Glenwood Landing, Nassau County, New York. The site is on the north shore of Long Island. It
slopes down to Hempstead Harbor on the west and Mott Cove on the south. The property to the north is
operated by a fuel oil distributor, and the property to the east is owned by a country club.
 
The site consists of 2 one-story buildings, 7 buried tanks, and 11 above-ground tanks. Seven of the above-
ground tanks are on an earthen wall that rises approximately 30 feet above grade.
 
In November 1980, AES started recovering fuels from hazardous wastes. Prior to that, the site was leased
and operated by Mattiace Petrochemicals. Several spills occurred during Mattiace's operation, including
approximately 3,000 gallons of toluene from an overturned tank trailer. After toluene was found seeping
into Hempstead Harbor, the company installed a trench that recovers an average of 500 gallons of organic
chemicals each month.
 
In several recent inspections, the State and EPA observed leaking barrels, tanks of solvents, and an oil
sheen in Mott Cove. The State has taken samples and plans further studies. Shore Realty, the current
owner of the site, evicted AES on January 5, 1984. In June 1984, the New York State Attorney General
brought suit against Shore Realty in Federal court to require the firm to take several remedial actions.
 
About 20,000 people draw drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : As a result of a court order, Shore Realty removed all the drums from the site in
November 1985. The State is using its own Superfund monies to clean out the storage tanks.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
