NPL Site Narrative for Applied Materials
 
APPLIED MATERIALS
Santa Clara, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Applied Materials produces equipment for manufacturing
wafers for the electronics industry at a plant in Santa Clara, Santa Clara County, California. The facility
occupies about 2.5 acres and is surrounded by business and industrial areas.
 
Monitoring wells on the site are contaminated with Freon 113, tetrachloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane,
1,1-dichloroethylene, and trichloroethylene, according to analyses conducted by a consultant to Applied
Materials. Contamination is believed to have resulted from leaking tanks. About 300,000 people depend on
wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
Applied Materials is working with the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB) to
determine the extent of contamination of ground water and soils.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
The plant received Interim Status under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) when the
company filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Status (January 1986) : The company has installed and is operating a system to pump and treat
contaminated ground water. CRWQCB, in conjunction with EPA and the California Department of Health
Services, is overseeing response actions at the site. Site investigations and cleanup continue to be
regulated by the board's Waste Discharge Requirements.
 
This site remains in proposed status until EPA implements the appropriate elements of its final policy for
placing RCRA-related sites on the NPL and then applies the policy to this site.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Subsequent investigation revealed that this site is not subject to the Subtitle C
permitting requirements of RCRA. Its score on the Hazard Ranking System, which EPA uses to evaluate
sites for the NPL, is above the cutoff point of 28.50, and EPA received no information that prevents placing
the site on the NPL. Therefore, it is being placed on the NPL.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
