NPL Site Narrative for Arrowhead
Associates, Inc./Scovill Corp.
 
ARROWHEAD ASSOCIATES, INC./SCOVILL CORP.
Montross, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Arrowhead Associates, Inc./Scovill Corp. Site occupies 25
acres in Montross in a rural area of Westmoreland County, Virginia. Scovill electroplated cosmetic cases
from 1966 to 1972, when Arrowhead, Inc., of Delaware acquired the business and assets of that facility.
Arrowhead continued electroplating until 1979. During 1979-81, Arrowhead filled cases with cosmetics at
the site. From 1979 to the present, several other firms have assembled and filled cosmetic cases on the
site, and from 1975 to the present, wiring harnesses for automobiles have been manufactured on the site.
 
Plating wastes were treated in a surface impoundment system and discharged to Scates Branch under
a permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). After the plating
stopped in 1979, process equipment and materials were abandoned at the site. Many drums of cyanide-
containing wastes and raw materials (including organic solvents) were left outside and were in various
stages of deterioration. Five sludge beds and a settling pond on-site contain elevated levels of chromium,
cyanide, and other hazardous substances, according to tests conducted in July 1985 by a consultant to
Scovill.
 
Ground water is shallow (25 feet in some cases) and soils permeable, conditions that facilitate movement
of contaminants leaking from the drums into ground water. An estimated 1,100 people obtain drinking
water from shallow private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
During monitoring under the NPDES permit, the Virginia State Water Control Board detected cyanide,
copper, and zinc in the discharge from the pond to Scates Branch. A coastal wetland is 1.2 miles from the
site. Local surface water is used for recreational activities within 3 miles downstream of the facility.
 
In 1986, Scovill Corp. signed a Consent Order with EPA under Sections 106(a) and 104(a), (b), and (e) of
CERCLA. The order requires the company to develop a plan to decontaminate and/or remove tanks on
the site and dispose of the contents; excavate, containerize, and dispose of visibly contaminated soils and
surface materials; close out and remove the sludge beds and settling pond; and sample the soil, surface
water, and sediments to define the depth and lateral extent of contamination and identify the spread of
contamination by surface water run-off routes. The company has completed the plan and is currently
implementing it. The only work remaining under the order is the closing and removal of the sludge beds
and settling ponds.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In July 1989, Scovill Corp. signed a Consent Order with the Virginia
Department of Waste Management to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The
state and EPA are reviewing the company's draft workplan for the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
