OLEM/OSRTI  Washington, DC 20460 
  NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)  
***NPL Site*** November 2019 
ARSENIC MINE Kent, New York Putnam County 
 Site Location: The Arsenic Mine site is located in Kent, Putnam County, New York. 
 
  Site History: The Arsenic Mine site operated as a mine from the mid -1800s through approximately 1918 in the extraction of 
 
arsenopyrite ore and arsenical sulphate ore. The ore was processed at a smelter location in Mamaroneck, New York for the manufacture of pesticides, pigments, glass, pharmaceuticals, poisons, and chemicals. The site is bordered by wetlands and small stream to the east; Pine Pond and residential and forested lands to the northeast; and a state park, Nimham Mountain Multiple Use Area, to the west and south. The site has since been subdivided for residential housing, and arsenic contaminated soils are found on the 10 residential properties surrounding the historic mine entrance.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: Arsenic levels exceed Removal Management  Levels (RMLs), Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels 
 
(MCLs) and other benchmark levels in soil and groundwater. There is widespread soil contamination on residential properties, and tailings are visibly emanating from areas near the historic mine entrance.    Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  Property owners are exposed to elevated levels of arsenic in soils, which present a human health threat. Long -term 
 
exposure to arsenic may cause chronic health effects.    Response Activities (to date): The EPA removal program has been very active at the site in assessing the widespread contamination and providing 
 
information to residents and government partners at all levels. At one residential property, the EPA installed and repaired a drinking water system where the potable water well had been installed through mine tailings, resulting in high arsenic levels within the property’s drinking water. Following assessment and careful consideration of further removal actions, the EPA determined that due to the high likelihood of recontamination, more comprehensive remedial action is necessary. In the interim, the EPA has educated the property owners on best practices for avoiding exposure to arsenic in soil and drinking water. Additiona lly, the EPA is conducting interim actions, which include installing  barriers to reduce direct contact threat.   Need for NPL Listing: Residents are exposed to elevated levels of arsenic in soils, which present a human health exposure threat. On April 30, 
 
2019, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) issued a public urgent Health Advisory which recommends the EPA take actions to mitigate residents’ exposure to contamination and take the necessary steps to implement a long-term cleanup. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of New York. 
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notic es]  For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFA
Qs. ATSDR ToxFAQs c an be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 

