 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2006 
 
ASARCO TAYLOR SPRINGS Taylor Springs, Illinois 
Montgomery County 
 
à Site Location: 
ASARCO Taylor Springs is a zinc oxide plant and a former  primary metals plant located on the south side of the village of Taylor Springs, Illinois, in Montgomery County. Th e former and current site operational area consists of 181 acres. 
 
´ Site History: 
American Zinc Lead and Smelting Company began ope rations as a zinc smelter from 1911 through 1924. In 1917, American Zinc Lead and Smelting Company began zinc oxi de production. ASARCO purchased the site from American Zinc Lead and Smelting Company (now Blue Tee Corporation) in 1971 and operated only the zinc oxide production. Current zinc oxide production is continued by Midwest Zinc. As pa rt of the zinc smelting process, slag (a by-product of the smelting process) was produced and placed in waste piles or  spread on the ground and particulate emissions containing cadmium, lead, zinc, and other inorganic substances were al so produced. As part of the zinc oxide production process, various grades of slab zinc products, sulfuric acid, copper, aluminum, lead, coal combustion wa stes (clinker), and slag were produced.  
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
A significant amount of the slag within the facility is stored in a waste pile that occupies approximately 2.5 acres and a shallow waste pile that occupies approximately 9.1 acres. Contamin ants of concern associated with the slag pile are metals, primarily arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, copper, lead, nickel, and zinc. 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Soil contamination is present at significantly elevated concen trations on residential properties adjacent to the ASARCO facility, potentially threatening approximately 20 residents.  
The slag pile is not contained, and surface water run-off is collected by two separate drainage routes to the west of the facility. These drainage routes both flow through a series of wetlands and into Middle Fork of Shoal Creek. Middle Fork of Shoal Creek is considered to be a fishery, and the wetla nds support small wildlife commonly found in and around healthy creeks in central Illinois. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
Since December 1994, ASARCO has performed several inve stigations under the supervision of Illinois EPA.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
 For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
