 
  
OSWER/OSRTI  Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (A TSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  ***Proposed Site*** March 2011 ASTORIA MARINE CONSTRUCTIONAstoria, Oregon 
COMPANYClatsop County 
 
à Site Location: 
The Astoria Marine Construction Company (AMCC) site is located on the east bank of Lewis and Clark River at its confluence with Jeffers Slough within the c ity limits of Astoria, Oregon.  The site occupies approximately 8 acres of low- lying land adjacent to tidal flats.   
´ Site History: 
The AMCC site is a marine shipyard that has been active since 1924.  The shipyard primarily constructed wooden boats and ships, except for brief periods during World War II and th e Korean Conflict, when the company constructed military vessels including minesweepers and tugs.  Currently, AMCC conducts manufacturing and repair on small marine vessels.    
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Various contaminates have been detected within upland s ources, ground water beneath the site, and within the Lewis and Clark River and Jeffers Slough sediments.  Concentrations of these contaminates exceed multiple screening levels, particularly within the sediments where concentrations have b een detected as high as 550 times applicable screening levels. Upland sources include a burn area estimated at 1,900 square feet, two grit piles estimated  at 1,500 and 300 square feet, and several areas of petroleum contaminated soils estimated at  400 square feet.  Site contaminants include heavy metals, polyaromatic hydrocarbons, and organotins.   
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: 
Site sources are potentially contaminating the Lewis and Clark River.  The site is located within the Columbia River Basin, which has been designated a national priority as one of the Nation’s great water bodies.  Thr ee species of federally listed endangered or threatened fish are presen t on the Columbia River, Lewis and Clark River, and Youngs River.  The Lewis and Clark River and Columbia River have been designated as critical habitat and migratory pathways critical for maintenance of a number of fish species .  The Lewis and Clark River, Columbia River, Youngs Bay, and Youngs River are also used as a sport and commercial fishery.  
3 Response Activities (to date): 
No response activities have been conducted to date.    
} Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of Oregon referred the site to EPA because th e Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) was unsuccessful in its efforts to get AMCC to enter the Voluntary Cleanup Program.  State cl eanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time because DEQ does not have funds available to address the site under its Abandoned Sites Program.  EPA received letters of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State of Oregon. 
