NPL Site Narrative for Atlantic Resources
Corporation
 
ATLANTIC RESOURCES CORPORATION
Sayreville, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 13, 2001) : The Atlantic Resources Corporation (ARC) site includes
contaminated soils on the ARC property and the releases of contaminants from those soils to the
surrounding marshes and to the Raritan River. The site is part of the former Horseshoe Road industrial
complex. The complex is located in a remote area in the northern outskirts of the Borough of Sayreville,
Middlesex County, New Jersey. The ARC site is located on the northeastern corner of the complex,
bordered to the north by the Middlesex County Utilities Authority (MCUA) property, and to the east by
Conrail. To the south is the Atlantic Development Corporation (ADC) area and to the west is the Horseshoe
Road Drum Dump (HRDD) area and the contaminated marsh area. The on-site facilities are approximately
200 feet from the Raritan River. The ADC, the HRDD and the marsh areas, and the Sayreville Pesticide
Dump area, located on the south side of ADC, comprise the Horseshoe Road Superfund site.
 
Historical aerial photographs indicate the ARC site was developed in 1939. The 1939 aerial photograph
indicates buildings and three surface impoundments. Prior to 1972 ammonia wastes were reported to have
been disposed of in these impoundments. Activities at the site during this period were primarily recycling
and recovery of precious, semi-precious, and non-precious metals. After 1972, the site continued to be
used for recycling activities including solvent reclamation; possible hazardous waste incineration; and
the reclamation, recovery, and refinement of precious metals, including gold and silver, from a variety of
sources, including film and printed circuit boards.
 
Waste management problems associated with the ARC operations have been noted since 1974, including
dumping and discharges directly to the Raritan River and to the marsh. The State of New Jersey, the U.S.
Coast Guard, the Middlesex County Health Department, and EPA have participated in investigations and/
or response actions at the ARC site.
 
The ARC site was originally included on the National Priorities List (NPL) as part of the Horseshoe Road
Superfund site in September 1995. As a result of legal actions taken by ARC, this property was formally
removed from the Horseshoe Road site in April 1997 (62 FR 15571). EPA noted at that time that "[r]emoval
of the ARC area does not preclude EPA from taking future action in that area if further evaluation reveals
the presence of contamination." Based on sampling performed between October 1997 and August 1998
as part of an EPA Remedial Investigation (RI) of the Horseshoe Road site, significant soil and subsoil,
surface water, and ground water contamination remains at the ARC site. Much of this contamination is
above applicable clean-up criteria. Based on these current conditions, EPA is adding the ARC site to the
NPL.
 
While the EPA RI clearly documents that the release from the ARC site is commingled with the release
from the Horseshoe Road site, the ARC site qualifies independently for placement on the NPL. Surface
water runoff from the ARC site flows via two drainageways to the contaminated marsh to the west of the
site. One drainageway, on the southern boundary of the ARC property, may drain overland flow from
both the ADC and ARC properties. The other drainageway, however (the central drainageway), carries
runoff only from the ARC site. The marsh, in turn, flows to the Raritan River. Water and sediment samples
taken from these drainageways as part of the EPA RI contain many of the same contaminants as the
contaminated soils on the ARC property. One of these samples, taken from the mouth of the central
drainageway, was taken as the water flowed into the adjacent marsh and demonstrates that the release
from ARC is entering and contributing to the contamination in the marsh. In turn, some of these same
contaminants are found downstream in the Raritan River, which is a human food chain fishery.
 
Status (September 2002) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
