NPL Site Narrative for Atlas Tack Corp.
 
ATLAS TACK CORP.
Fairhaven, Massachusetts
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Atlas Tack Corp. formerly manufactured cut and wire tacks,
steel nails, and similar items on a 12-acre site at 83 Pleasant Street in Fairhaven, Bristol County,
Massachusetts. The area is residential/commercial. During 1891-1985, the facility conducted annealing,
pickling, plating, enameling, and cleaning operations. From the early 1940s to the mid-to-late 1970s,
wastes containing arsenic, heavy metals, and cyanide were discharged into an unlined acid neutralizing
lagoon approximately 200 feet east of the manufacturing building and adjacent to a salt water tidal marsh
in Buzzards Bay Estuary.
 
In 1984, EPA detected beryllium, mercury, nickel, toluene, and ethylbenzene in the marsh and surface
water south of the lagoon, and also observed a mixture of soil and dried lagoon sediments outside the
lagoon. Also in 1984, EPA analysis of on-site monitoring wells identified elevated concentrations of
cyanide, toluene, and other compounds. An estimated 15,000 people obtain drinking water from public and
private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
During the 1980s, Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality Engineering issued Notices of
Violation of Hazardous Waste Regulations against Atlas Tack for its "failure/refusal to remove lagoon
contents."
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In a May 1989 report, Atlas Tack identified contaminants that exceed ambient
water quality standards in surface water and ground water. The company has proposed cleanup levels to
the State.
 
EPA and the State are investigating the possibility that Atlas Tack will conduct a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
