NPL Site Narrative for Avco Lycoming
(Williamsport Division)
 
AVCO LYCOMING (WILLIAMSPORT DIVISION)
Williamsport, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Avco Lycoming (Williamsport Division) Site consists
of approximately 28 acres in the west-central portion of Williamsport, Lycoming County, Pennsylvania.
For over 50 years, this facility has been primarily involved in the production of aircraft engines. The plant
operates a still for the reclamation of Varsol, a petroleum solvent, and (since the early 1950s) a waste
treatment facility. Past poor housekeeping practices apparently have contaminated the site, according to
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER).
 
On-site monitoring wells, off-site downgradient wells, and a well field of the Williamsport Municipal Water
Authority (WMWA) 3,000 feet southwest of the site are contaminated with trichloroethylene and chromium,
according to tests conducted in 1985 by a consultant to the company. The well field was used as a backup
supply under drought conditions until it was closed in November 1984 because of contamination with
volatile organic chemicals. WMWA serves about 65,000 people within 3 miles of the site.
 
In November 1985, Avco and PA DER signed a Consent Order and Agreement involving monitoring of
ground water and cleanup of on-site soils and ground water. Currently, on-site ground water is being
pumped, treated to remove contaminants, and returned to the ground. Cleanup of the municipal well field
was not addressed in the order.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In June 1988, EPA and Avco signed a CERCLA Administrative Order on
Consent requiring Avco to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the
type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. PA DER and
EPA approved the workplan, and field activities started in September 1989. The RI/FS is expected to be
completed in early 1991.
 
Pumping and treatment of on-site ground water continue. The county installed an air stripper on the
municipal well field, making the water acceptable for consumption. The field is used on a standby basis.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
