NPL Site Narrative for B & B Chemical Co.,
Inc.
 
B & B CHEMICAL CO., INC.
Hialeah, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : B & B Chemical Co., Inc., has manufactured industrial cleaning
compounds on a 2-acre site in a highly industrialized area in Hialeah, Dade County, Florida, since 1958.
The Miami Canal is 800 feet to the southwest.
 
The company prepares its proprietary products in mixing vats. Approximately once a year the vats and tank
trucks are washed down. Before 1976, the waste water was deposited in unlined lagoons. Since then, it
has gone into a pretreatment system before being discharged into the Hialeah sewer system.
 
Since about 1975, the Dade County Department of Environmental Resource Management (DERM)
has been concerned about the impact of the lagoons on ground water in the vicinity. In 1985, EPA
found solvents such as chlorobenzene, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, 1,2-dichlorobenzene, and 1,4-
dichlorobenzene in monitoring wells on and off the site and chromium in on-site wells. Wells in the
contaminated area have been taken out of service.
 
In 1987, a B & B contractor conducted a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the
type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
The Biscayne Aquifer, which EPA has designated as a sole source aquifer under the Safe Drinking Water
Act, supplies drinking water for all of Dade County. At the site, a layer of quartz sand overlies the limestone
aquifer; both formations have very high horizontal and vertical permeabilities. These conditions facilitate
movement of contaminants into ground water, as well as movement of contaminated ground water. Four
municipal well fields -- the John E. Preston, the Hialeah, and the Upper and Lower Miami Springs -- are
within 3 miles of the site. One well is within 3,000 feet of the site. The four well fields serve 750,000 people.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : B & B installed an air stripper to remove volatile organic compounds from
ground water but stopped operating it in early 1989 without approval of DERM or EPA.
 
In October 1989, EPA determined that B & B's RI/FS was inadequate. EPA has requested access to the
site to complete the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
