OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site***  Septe mb e r 2014  
  BAGHURST DRIVE    Harleysville, Pennsylvania 
  Montgomery County  
Site Location:  
The site is lo cated in a rural, residentia l area in Southeastern Pennsylvania about 35 miles northwest of Philadelphia. 
Site History: 
The sit e consists of a ground water plume contaminated with volatile organi c compounds (VOCs). The sourc e of  the 
VO Cs is unknown. In  1999,  the Montgomer y Coun ty H ealth Department (MCHD) discovered the plume when they 
samp led r esidential wells in the area. The Pennsy lvania Department of Environmental Prot ect ion (PADEP) 
immedi ately began supplying 27 residen ce s with bottled drinking water and subsequentl y equipped  the homes with 
carbon filtration systems. PAD EP conducted an investigation  to identify the source of the contamination but were 
unable to prod uce definitive documentation regarding the sour ce. The site h as contaminated 27 residential d rinking 
water well s, including a common we ll and  is also affecting an additional 13 -15  residential wells that have 
trace a
mounts of contaminants. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
The plume is approximately  2,500 fe et long and 750 feet wide and is contaminated with VOCs: 1,1,1-trichloroethane 
(1,1,1-TCA), 1,1-dichloroethene (1,1-DCE), trichloroethyl ene (TCE), vinyl chloride and 1,4-dioxane. The carbon 
filtration syste ms are not effectively filtering out the 1,4-dioxane and the refor e the PAD EP is also providing residents 
whose wells have concen trations of 1,4-dioxane ex ceeding the state action leve ls with bottled w ater. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
The site is known to have contaminated 27 residential d rinking water well s, including a common we ll whi ch serves 
10 residences. There are also  an  additional 13-15  residential wells that h ave trace amounts of contaminants. 
Althoug
h ground water is the p rincipal reason for li sting,  there also ma y be v apor intrusion issues since these houses 
are ov erlying a contaminated ground water plume. 
 Respon se Activities (to date):  
The EPA h as pe rformed  no  response actions at this site. PAD EP has p rovided aff ected residences with carbon 
filtr ation systems and/or bottled water. 
 Need for NPL Listi ng:  
The PAD EP referred the site to the EPA b ecau se the plume is affecti ng many residen ces and the carbon 
filtr ation systems a re not effectiv ely filtering out a ll contaminants. A pe rmanent altern ative water supply is ne cessa ry 
along with the remediation of the underlying plume. Other c lea nup alte rnativ es were ev aluated, but a re not viable 
at this time b ecause a pe rmanent al ternate source of d rinking water is not readily av ailable. The EPA r ecei ved a 
letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the commonw ealth of Pennsylvania. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may 
change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent 
FR notices.]  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to 
these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on 
the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42 -ATSDR or 1-888 -422-8737.
