 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** March 2007 
 
BANDERA ROAD 
GROUND WATER PLUMELeon Valley, Texas  
Bexar County 
 
 
à Site Location: 
 The Bandera Road Ground Water Plume site is situated in Bexar County, in the City of Leon Valley, which is in the northwestern section of the City of Sa n Antonio, Texas.  The site encompasses an area approximately one mile long by one-half mile wide. The plume is centered in a business area,  with some residential homes nearby, between Poss Road and Grissom Road, approximately 590 feet southwest of Bandera Road.  
 
´ Site History: 
 This plume was identified through assessment activ ities conducted by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Voluntary Cleanup Program. The investigati on identified the presence of tetrachloroethene (PCE) and trichloroethene (TCE) in concentrations above the Safe Drinking Water Maximum Contamination Level (MCL) of 5.0 parts per billion (ppb) within the Edwards Aquifer. The site  consists of a PCE and TCE contaminated ground water plume originating from unidentified source(s).  
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
  Five private water wells have been determined to contain concentrations of PCE above the MCL, and several of these  also have TCE above the MCL.  The c oncentration of PCE ranges from 23 to 82 ppb and the concentration of TCE ranges from 0.530 to 7.53 ppb in the five wells. Six ot her private water wells have been sampled and the results indicate detected concentrations below the MCL.  
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
 Five residential wells with concentrations above the PCE MCL have been identified. There are currently 6 other 
residential wells below the MCL. Two City of Leon Valley public  water supply wells are within one mile of the center of 
the contaminated ground water plume.  The contaminated wells ar e screened in the Edwards Aquifer which is typically at a 
depth of 350 to 400 feet in the area. The Edwards aquifer is a karst aquifer and a sole source aquifer for central Texas. 
Continuous sampling of private drinking water wells in the a quifer suggests that the plume is spreading and potentially 
threatening other private and public drinking water wells.  
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
 TCEQ installed granulated activated charcoal water filtr ation systems on the five contaminated private wells (PCE concentrations greater than the MCL). TCEQ is currently sampling the wells on a semi-annual basis.  
 
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
