NPL Site Narrative for Bangor Ordnance
Disposal (USNAVY)
 
BANGOR ORDNANCE DISPOSAL (USNAVY)
Bremerton, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Bangor Naval Submarine Base is near Bremerton,
Kitsap County, Washington. Site A is a 6-acre hazardous waste site on the base used by the Explosive
Ordnance Disposal Team as a test range. Between 1965 and 1973, the U.S. Navy demilitarized over
2 million pounds of explosive ordnance at this base. Surface water and shallow ground water are
contaminated with cyclonite (RDX) and trinitrotoluene (TNT). The site is 0.5 mile from Hood Canal, a
sensitive marine environment. A small residential community lies 0.5 mile to the north in one possible
direction of ground water flow.
 
Bangor is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Navy completed an initial assessment study of Bangor during June 1983. The assessment
concluded that further investigation is needed at the Ordnance Disposal Site as well as other sites on the
facility. Further investigation will determine the extent of contamination and define any action necessary to
control remaining contamination and/or clean up the site. The Navy has undertaken corrective actions to
direct surface water away from the site and away from the residential community.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Bangor began to study contamination on the installation in the summer of 1985.
EPA is waiting for an evaluation report of the initial data.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
