NPL Site Narrative for Barkhamsted-New
Hartford Landfill
 
BARKHAMSTED-NEW HARTFORD LANDFILL
Barkhamsted, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Barkhamsted-New Hartford Landfill encompasses 102.5
acres in a rural/residential area of Barkhamsted, Litchfield County, Connecticut. Since 1974, it has been
owned and operated by Regional Refuse Disposal District One. This unlined municipal landfill is near the
Barkhamsted and New Hartford town line. An unnamed brook borders the site to the southwest and north
and flows through a wetland to the Farmington River 1.3 stream miles from where sludge was deposited on
the site.
 
In December 1983, the landfill received a Solid Waste Disposal Facility Permit from the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection (CT DEP). The landfill accepts municipal and industrial wastes,
including oily metal grindings sludge containing cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, nickel, zinc, and
manganese. A barrel-crushing operation also is on-site to reclaim metals.
 
In 1983, leaking drums containing hazardous solvents were observed on-site during a CT DEP inspection.
Tests conducted in 1986-87 by the landfill's consultant indicate volatile organic compounds, including
xylene, toluene, 1,1-dichloroethane, 4-methyl-2-pentanone, and vinyl chloride, are present in shallow and
deep wells on-site. Many private wells and a municipal supply well for New Hartford are within 3 miles of
the site. The wells serve an estimated 4,800 people. The closest private well is 770 feet southeast of a
contaminated well. The Farmington Valley Health District shut down the on-site well serving the landfill
office due to volatile organic contamination.
 
The site is not completely fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact
with hazardous substances.
 
In April 1988, EPA emergency staff sampled the landfill and determined that no removal action was
warranted at that time.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
