NPL Site Narrative for Barstow Marine
Corps Logistics Base
 
BARSTOW MARINE CORPS LOGISTICS BASE
Barstow, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Barstow Marine Corps Logistics Base is in San Bernardino
County, California. It is in the Mojave Desert and adjacent to the Mojave River. A portion of the base,
the 1,568-acre Nebo Area, is approximately 1 mile east of the City of Barstow. It has been used for
maintenance, repair, and rebuilding of supplies and equipment for the Marine Corps since 1942. Solvent
wastes, including trichloroethylene (TCE), were apparently generated in substantial quantities in the Nebo
Area facility. Due to the lack of records, the quantities of solvents used, stored, and discharged on-site are
unknown. The same activities were conducted at the 1,681-acre Yermo Area, 6 miles east of Nebo.
 
Barstow Marine Corps Logistics Base is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP),
established in 1978. Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and
clean up contamination from hazardous materials.
 
Monitoring wells at both Nebo and Yermo are contaminated with TCE, according to tests conducted in
1984-85 as part of IRP studies and by the U.S. Geological Survey. Public wells within 3 miles of hazardous
substances at the base supply drinking water to an estimated 28,700 residents of the city of Barstow and
outlying areas.
 
The Marine Corps has completed an initial assessment/site inspection and is planning a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for
remedial action at both the Nebo and Yermo areas. An activated carbon system for treating contaminated
drinking water wells at Yermo is scheduled to be installed in July 1989.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : The activated carbon system is now operating.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
