NPL Site Narrative for Bay City
Middlegrounds
 
BAY CITY MIDDLEGROUNDS
Bay City, Michigan
 
 
The Bay City Middlegrounds site occupies approximately 40 acres of land on Middlegrounds Island in the
Saginaw River in Bay City, Michigan. The Bay City Middlegrounds site is located at 800 Evergreen Dr. just
north of Cass Ave. Approximately 58,900 people live within a 4-mile radius of the site.
 
The Bay City Middlegrounds site is an inactive landfill and dredged sediment disposal area owned
and previously operated by Bay City. The landfill accepted wood, concrete and other construction and
demolition debris, municipal and household wastes, and industrial wastes, both liquids and solids. The
sediment disposal area consists of piles of sediments dredged from the Saginaw River and Saginaw Bay
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The sediments in some areas of the river and bay have been found
to be contaminated with a variety of hazardous substances, including pesticides and PCBs.
 
The landfill contains a mixture of wastes, including construction and demolition debris, household and
municipal wastes, and solid and liquid industrial wastes. There has been extensive sampling of the soils
and groundwater associated with the landfill and analytical results have revealed high concentrations of
PCBs in certain areas of the landfill. Other contaminants found at elevated concentrations include solvents,
benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes, polynucleic aromatics, phthalates, pesticides, and a variety of
other contaminants.
 
The dredged sediment piles on the north end of the site were placed on the site, dewatered, and used for
other purposes including daily cover for the landfill. Analytical results from the samples collected from this
source have revealed the presence of polynucleic aromatics, phthalates, PCBs, pesticides, and heavy
metals.
 
Hazardous substances from the site have contaminated the groundwater and surface water. The major
threat that the site poses is to surface water. Contaminated groundwater and surface runoff discharge
to the Saginaw River and have contaminated areas which are fished as well as a small river wetland. A
drinking water intake for the Bay municipal system, which serves approximately 94,426 in Bay City and
the surrounding area, could potentially be affected by site contamination; also potentially affected are
more fisheries in the river as well as in the bay, wetlands, Federal- and State-designated threatened and
endangered species, and a State-designated wildlife area.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
