NPL Site Narrative for Baytown Township
Ground Water Plume
 
BAYTOWN TOWNSHIP GROUND WATER PLUME
Baytown Township, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 14, 1992) : The Baytown Township Ground Water Plume site is defined
by 34 contaminated wells (31 of which provide drinking water) in Baytown Township, Washington County,
Minnesota. The county is one of the seven-county metropolitan area surrounding the Twin Cities.
 
In June 1987, the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) sampled wells in the area surrounding the
Baytown Dump as part of a State-wide program to determine water quality near solid waste facilities.
The results indicated private wells were contaminated with volatile organic compounds such as 1,1,2-
trichloroethene (TCE), 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethene (PCE), and cis-1,2-dichloroethene. MDH then issued a
well advisory for the Baytown Township area.
 
The MDH data indicate a plume of TCE-contaminated ground water extends for 3 miles from the main
hangar complex at the Lake Elmo Airport. The majority of the plume continues through Baytown Township,
involving a 1.5-mile-wide strip extending from Manning Avenue on the west to the St. Croix River. An
estimated 10,450 live in the area, which is primarily agricultural and rural-residential.
 
The highest concentrations of TCE were detected in the vicinity of the main hangar complex at the airport.
TCE may have been used in parts cleaning activities in this area. Also, the contaminated wells at the
airport have chlorinated solvent concentrations up to an order of magnitude higher than the majority
of the contaminated wells located east of the airport, according to tests conducted during 1987-91 by
State agencies and the Metropolitan Airports Commission (MAC), which owns and operates the Lake
Elmo Airport. The location of the ground water plume suggests that at least a portion of the TCE may be
attributable to a source on or near the airport property. Although some of the TCE contamination may be
attributable to past activities at the airport, other sources of TCE and other chlorinated solvents may also
exist in the area.
 
An estimated 26,000 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 4 miles of the site.
 
Status (December 1994) : The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) and MAC have continued
ground water monitoring at the site. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR)
reportedly completed a health assessment of the site. MPCA has also been conducting a limited Remedial
Investigation (RI) on their own.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
