NPL Site Narrative for Beacon Heights
Landfill
 
BEACON HEIGHTS LANDFILL
Beacon Falls, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The Beacon Heights Landfill covers 83 acres on the crest
of a large hill in a sparsely populated area of Beacon Falls, Connecticut. It operated intermittently
from the 1920s through the late 1970s. From 1970 until it was closed in 1979, the site operated as a
minimum-cover landfill for mixed municipal and industrial waste. Hockcanum Brook is contaminated with
chloroform, methyl acetate, and ethyl acetate. The State initiated several legal actions against the owners,
beginning in 1972. When the landfill was closed, the terms of the 1977 permit for closure were not met,
and the landfill continued to accept sludge from waste water treatment plants. The sludge was added to
support vegetation in areas which were to be covered. The areas have been seeded and are supporting
vegetation. Sludge from waste water treatment plants continues to be accepted and is applied on top of the
existing vegetation.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA recently completed a Remedial Action Master Plan outlining the investigations
needed to determine the full extent of cleanup required at the site. It recommends that a $356,000, 9-
month remedial investigation/feasibility study be undertaken to fully characterize the site and evaluate
alternatives. Included is a sampling program for 35 private wells. Source controls to be evaluated include
capping and diversion of surface water flow. Off-site actions to be evaluated include provisions of alternate
water supplies, if needed, and treatment of the identified contaminant plume.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
