NPL Site Narrative for Beaunit Corp.
(Circular Knit & Dyeing Plant)
 
BEAUNIT CORP. (CIRCULAR KNIT & DYEING PLANT)
Fountain Inn, South Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Beaunit Corp., presently BEM Holding Corp., operated the
Circular Knit & Dyeing Plant in Fountain Inn, Greenville County, South Carolina, during 1958-77. An
abandoned lagoon used during that time is behind the Wilson Sporting Goods store at 206 Georgia Street.
The lagoon is approximately 70 feet in diameter and varies in depth with rainfall. Roughly 6 feet of sludge
are on the bottom. No barriers exist around the lagoon. This apparently unlined lagoon was used for
treatment of waste from Beaunit's dyeing process. The lagoon discharged into an unnamed stream that
flows northwest to join Howard Branch.
 
In June 1985, the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control found volatile organic
compounds, including 1,1-dichloroethane and 1,1,1-trichloroethane, in the lagoon and the nearby unnamed
stream. PCBs and heavy metals, including chromium and lead, were present in soil and sediment at the
site.
 
Soils in the area are permeable and ground water is shallow (15 feet in some places). These conditions
facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water. An estimated 1,000 people obtain drinking water
from private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : EPA has completed a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site and plans to negotiate with them to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
