 
 OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
  N ATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST (NPL)   
***Final Site***    December 2013 
BECK’S LAKE South Bend, Indiana St. Joseph County  
 Site Location: The Beck’s Lake site consists of an area of contaminated soil located at the intersection of Washington and Falcon Streets on the northwest side of South Bend, Indiana and adjacent to LaSalle Park.   Site History: The property now known as Beck’s Lake/LaSalle Park in South Bend, Indiana was once used as a dump and landfill. Numerous companies and individuals, including Bendix Corporation, reportedly dumped a variety of materials containing hazardous substances at this location. Historical aerial photos indicate that dumping occurred for more than 40 years at the site ending in the mid-1950s. From the 1950s to the present this area has been turned into a park and some residential housing by the City of South Bend.   Sit
e Contamination/Contaminants: Potential waste materials dumped at the site included, but were not limited to: asbestos, plating wastes, solvents, paint wastes, oils and sludges and foundry sand. Foundry sand and hydroxide sludge contained arsenic. High levels of arsenic have been found in the park and neighborhood surface soils. Other metals found with elevated levels (lead and cadmium) have also been detected in park surface soils.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Exposure to arsenic in residential soils is the main concern for the Beck’s Lake site.   Response Activities (to date): There have been no respons
e activities.   Need for NPL Listing: NPL listing will allow the EPA to address soil contamination on residential properties surrounding the site, allow for proper and timely investigation of the nature and extent of the contamination and enable the EPA to determine cleanup alternatives. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing the Beck’s Lake site on the NPL from the state of Indiana. 
               
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp 
or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
