NPL Site Narrative for Beede Waste Oil
 
BEEDE WASTE OIL
Plaistow, New Hampshire
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 1996) : Beede Waste Oil is an inactive waste oil recycling and virgin fuel oil
storage and distribution facility located on Kelley Road in Plaistow, Rockingham County, New Hampshire.
The site includes two adjacent parcels totaling 39 acres. The first parcel has been occupied by oil-related
businesses since 1926, when Robert Beede operated a waste oil recycling facility on site, receiving
waste oils, collecting and storing the oils on site in containers, and then reselling usable oils to asphalt
manufacturing facilities and towns for dust suppression. Between 1964 and 1979, Cash Oil operated
on site, and in 1979 Cash Energy, Inc. purchased the property. The last oil-related business, Tri-State
Resources, left the property in August 1994.
 
Waste oil was deposited in a surface impoundment for an unknown duration between 1960 and 1975
and in an underground storage vault from an unspecified date until its removal in 1991. The oils were
periodically pumped into a series of aboveground storage tanks (ASTs). By 1978, 86 ASTs with a total
capacity of 1.3 million gallons were in use; 38 of these tanks have been documented to contain waste oil,
sludge, and/or water contaminated with PCBs and/or metals. Several tanks are known to have leaked,
including one used to store PCB-contaminated waste oil. Soils on site are contaminated with PCBs. Three
underground storage tanks used to store waste oils were removed sometime after 1979. More than 200
drums of oil, sludge, and contaminated soil are stockpiled on site. PCB-contaminated soils were stockpiled
on the second parcel.
 
Investigations conducted by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and EPA have
characterized on-site sources and documented contamination of on-site soils, ground water, surface
water, sediments, and nearby drinking water supplies. Chlorinated VOCs, PCBs, copper, and zinc have
been detected in Kelley Brook and associated wetlands. Ground water is contaminated with chlorinated
VOCs and metals, and concentrations of vinyl chloride and arsenic in a nearby drinking water well exceed
maximum contaminant levels. The State has provided a point-of-use treatment system for residents of the
affected condominium complex.
 
Status (December 1996) : Oil seeping into Kelley Brook is being addressed though the use of absorbent
pads and booms. The New Hampshire Department of Fish and Game recently conducted a fish tissue
survey to measure potential impacts from PCBs in Kelley Brook. EPA is continuing its phased approach to
site investigation and cleanup. An emergency removal action, begun in July to characterize and remove
all hazardous bulk liquids stored in ASTs and drums on site, will be completed in December. A Remedial
Investigation/Feasibility Study and a baseline risk assessment, which are being done by the State, are
expected to begin next year.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
