 
   
   
  
   
    
   
   
    
  
   
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** April 2009 
BEHR DAYTON THERMAL SYSTEM Dayton, Ohio VOC PLUME Montgomery County 
àSite Location: Behr Dayton Thermal System VOC Plume is located at 1600 Webster Street, Dayton, Montgomery County, Ohio. 
´Site History: In 2003 and 2006, volatile organic compounds, including trichloroethene (TCE), were detected in shallow ground water beneath the Behr Dayton Thermal System facility. 
rSite Contamination/Contaminants: Behr Dayton Therma
l System is a manufacturer of parts and sub-assemblies of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment for car and truck manufacturers.  Industrial solvent cleaners were used in the site manufacturing processes.  The solvent cleaners included TC E, tetrachloroethene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane and sulphuric acid. TCE and other volatile organic compounds have been reported in shallow ground water beneath the Behr facility. 
vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Ground water has been contaminated above EPA’s Safe Dr inking W
ater Act’s maximum contaminant level (MCL) for TCE. Also, TCE vapors have migrated into residential homes and commercial businesses above a safe indoor air level. 
3Response Activities (to date): On December 19, 2006, an Adm
inistrative Order by Consent was signed between EPA and DaimlerChrysler (former owner of the Behr facility) to investigate and mitigate reside nces near the facility.  As of October, 2008, Chrysler had installed 51 indoor air mitigation systems in residential and commercial businesses.  By May 5, 2008, Chrysler had installed a soil vapor extraction system south of the Behr facility.  In November 2006, EPA funded additional residential sampling and mitigation in the area.  As of October 2008, EPA had installed 150 total indoor air mitigation systems within the residential neighborhood south of the Behr facility. 
}Need for NPL Listing: The State of Ohio referred the site to EPA because TCE was detected in shallow ground water above its MCL and in indoor air above safe levels in 201 residential homes and com
mercial businesses.  There is also a potential threat to additional residents and businesses in the area. Other fe deral and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time because there are insufficient state funds to  address the cleanup of this site.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
