NPL Site Narrative for Bell Landfill
 
BELL LANDFILL
Terry Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Bell Landfill covers 33 acres northeast of New Albany in Terry
Township, Bradford County, Pennsylvania. Prior to 1970, the privately owned and operated site served
primarily as an open dump for municipal trash. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
(PA DER) began inspecting the site in 1977 and in 1978 permitted an asphalt-lined portion of the fill to
accept ferric hydroxide sludge from GTE Sylvania Products Corp.'s Towanda plant. During 1979-81, the
plant disposed of 8,226 tons of the sludge into the lined portion of the fill. After numerous permit violations
due to improper cover material and inadequate leachate collection, PA DER closed the site in 1982. The
former owner/operator's estate had the disposal areas partially covered with soil.
 
In 1984, EPA detected barium in a private well near the site. An estimated 800 people use private wells
within 3 miles of the site for drinking water. Also in 1984, EPA observed leachate seeping from the site into
an unnamed tributary to Sugar Run, which is used for recreational activities within 3 miles downstream of
the site. According to EPA, the leachate contained high levels of numerous organic pollutants, including
aromatics, chlorinated aliphatics, ketones, and phthalates, and inorganics, including barium, cadmium,
lead, and zinc. Trichloroethylene and heavy metals were found in an on-site pond used for watering farm
animals.
 
The site is unfenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with hazardous
substances.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA is conducting a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site and will then negotiate with them to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
