NPL Site Narrative for Beloit Corp.
 
BELOIT CORP.
Rockton, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Beloit Corp. has occupied a 175-acre site in the Village
of Rockton, Winnebago County, Illinois, since 1961. There are two operations at the site: a plant for
manufacturing wet-end paper-making machines, and a research and development facility for designing and
demonstrating the machines to prospective customers.
 
The facility purchases clean virgin pulp to make multilayered paper products. The waste paper and paper
fibers generated go to three unlined surface impoundments. The paper fiber sediment from the bottom of
the impoundments is spread on the ground in accordance with a State permit issued in December 1983.
 
On-site monitoring wells contain 1,1,1-trichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethane, and 1,1-dichloroethylene, and
nearby private wells contain trichloroethylene, according to tests conducted in November 1985 by Beloit
Corp. An estimated 15,000 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the
site. The Winnebago County Department of Public Health, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
(IEPA), and the Illinois Department of Public Health are working together on a program to monitor ground
water in the Rockford area.
 
In May 1983, IEPA found 1,1,1-trichloroethane, trichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene in sediments in
the impoundments and in November 1985 found toluene in water in the impoundments. Rock River is less
than 50 feet from Beloit's surface impoundments. Local surface water is used for recreational activities.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : Under a cooperative agreement with EPA, signed in March 1990, IEPA is
investigating the possibility that parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site will
conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the
site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
