NPL Site Narrative for Bendix Flight
Systems Division
 
BENDIX FLIGHT SYSTEMS DIVISION
Bridgewater Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : Bendix Flight Systems Division manufactures aircraft
instruments on a 40-acre site in Bridgewater Township, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania. From 1952 to
1978, solvent wastes were dumped onto the ground on the property.
 
A consultant to Bendix has studied the site and submitted a remedial plan to the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources (PA DER). According to the consultant's study, the principal sources of
contamination appear to be a trichloroethylene storage tank area and a pit/trench used for disposal. Other
potential contributors are the former distillation facility and an old landfill.
 
On-site soils contain significant levels of several volatile organic solvents which have contaminated 11 off-
site residential wells, according to tests conducted by the consultant. About 1,400 people draw drinking
water from private wells within 3 miles of the site. Bendix has installed filters on water lines to residents
with contaminated wells and has also studied local geological conditions, installed monitoring wells, and
prepared a plan for cleaning up contaminated soil and ground water.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : PA DER is negotiating a Consent Order and Agreement with Bendix Flight
Systems Division to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
