NPL Site Narrative for Bendix Corp./Allied
Automotive
 
BENDIX CORP./ALLIED AUTOMOTIVE
St. Joseph, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Bendix Corp., now known as Allied Automotive, manufactures
automotive brake systems on a 4.4-acre site in St. Joseph, Berrien County, Michigan. The facility is located
in a well-populated area, both commercial/industrial and residential in nature.
 
During approximately 1966-75, Bendix used a seepage lagoon for disposal of machine shop process waste
water. According to information Bendix provided to EPA, spent chlorinated organic solvents, waste water
from electroplating operations, spent cyanide plating bath solutions, chromium, and lead were placed in the
lagoon.
 
A hydrogeologic study performed in 1986 by a consultant to Allied detected contamination in the
shallow sand aquifer; 35 monitoring wells were installed and found to contain 1,1-dichloroethane, 1,2-
dichloroethane, trichloroethylene, trans-1,2-dichlorethylene, and vinyl chloride. An estimated 4,300 people
obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site. A private well approximately 750 feet from
the site was closed in 1982 because of contamination. The well owner now obtains water from a municipal
system.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : On February 13, 1989, Bendix (Allied Automotive) entered into an
Administrative Order on Consent with EPA to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
In August 1989, Bendix began work on a treatability study to determine if a biological process would be a
feasible alternative for removing the volatile organic chemicals in ground water underlying the site.
 
Currently, Bendix is modifying the workplan for the RI/FS in response to EPA's comments and plans to
begin field work early in 1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
