NPL Site Narrative for Bennett Stone
Quarry
 
BENNETT STONE QUARRY
Bloomington, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : The Bennett Stone Quarry is about 1 mile northwest of
Bloomington, Indiana. In April 1983, the Monroe County Health Department defined an area of several
acres that had been used for dumping of electrical parts, including a large number of PCB-contaminated
capacitors. Labels identified them as Westinghouse Type FP Outdoor capacitors. Soils adjacent to the
capacitors are stained with oil, and the entire fill area is generally void of vegetation. Two ponds along
the west border of the site have oil sheens. Both drain into Stout Creek. The State detected PCBs in soil
(maximum of 38% Aroclor 1248), stream sediments, and surface water. Pond sediments on the west side
contain high levels (102 parts per million) of Aroclor 1242. This site is located in a region where limestone
is extensively quarried for building stone. The population immediately surrounding this site generally
depends on wells, but no drinking water contamination has been documented to date.
 
In July 1983, EPA completed a three-phase emergency cleanup, which involved (1) removal and disposal
of capacitors on the surface and contaminated soils, (2) an aerial photographic survey, geophysical study,
and soil sampling, (3) placement of an impervious cap over the site to prevent run-off of contaminants, and
(4) construction of security fencing around the site. The total cost was $225,000 in CERCLA emergency
funds.
 
Status (June 1984) : Negotiations are underway with Westinghouse to determine what further remedial
measures are necessary at this site and four other PCB disposal sites in the Bloomington area. A trial
originally scheduled for January 1983 has been stayed pending negotiations. Negotiations concerning a
Consent Decree are underway.
 
The extent of the contamination was established in May 1984.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
