NPL Site Narrative for Big River Mine
Tailings/St. Joe Minerals Corp.
 
BIG RIVER MINE TAILINGS/ST. JOE MINERALS CORP.
Desloge, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 7, 1992) : The Big River Mine Tailings/St. Joe Minerals Corp. site in
Desloge, St. Francois County, Missouri, was used for disposal of lead mine tailings during 1929-58. The
site is in a former mining region about 70 miles south of St. Louis often referred to as the "Old Lead Belt."
The region (approximately 110 square miles) contains numerous tailings ponds and piles.
 
St. Joe Minerals Corp. operated the site, disposing lead-, cadmium-, and zinc-rich mine tailings over
approximately 600 acres in a rural area bordered on three sides by Big River. In 1972, the company
donated 502 acres of the land to St. Francois County, which then leased the land to St. Francois County
Environmental Corp. (SFCEC). Since 1973, SFCEC has operated a sanitary landfill on approximately 60
acres of the southern section of the tailings pile.
 
EPA learned of the site in 1977, when an estimated 50,000 cubic yards of tailings slumped into the Big
River during a heavy rain. After the collapse, the Missouri Department of Conservation detected elevated
lead levels in bottom-feeding fish and advised local residents not to eat the fish. In 1981, St. Joe Minerals
attempted to stabilize the tailings. In 1982, an extensive investigation conducted by the Columbia National
Fisheries Research Laboratory detected elevated lead concentrations (5 to 26 micrograms per liter) in
the surface water. Elevated lead levels were reported in the bottom-feeding biota. Big River is used for
recreational fishing, water-contact recreation, and watering of commercial livestock.
 
In January 1988, during a site reconnaissance, EPA noted that a strong wind was creating a suspended
particulate plume. EPA sampled the tailings pile in January 1988 and July 1990, detecting elevated
concentrations of lead, cadmium, and zinc. High-volume air sampling conducted during the 1990 site
investigation indicated that wind erosion and airborne dust created a potential hazard for on-site workers,
residents, and children at a day care center. Approximately 23,000 people live within 4 miles of the site.
People on the site are also exposed to contaminated soil.
 
Status (October 1992) : EPA's emergency staff is assessing the site to determine if a removal action is
necessary.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
