OLEM/OSRTIWashington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** September  2021 
BILLINGS PCE Billings, Montana Yellowstone County 
Site Location:
The site is located in Billings, Montana, extending from near the intersection of 13th Street and Central Avenue to the northeast and into downtown. 
 Site History: 
The Billings PCE site consists of a contaminated shallow groundwater plume that underlies residential and commercial areas. The plume contains chlorinated solvents, primarily tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and trichloroethylene (TCE). The primary source of contamination is believed to be the Big Sky Linen facility. This facility conducted drycleaning operations using PCE from 1967 through 1993. High concentrations of PCE in the soils and groundwater on Big Sky Linen’s property indicate this property is a significant source of contamination. Three additional smaller sources have been identified. These sources are the Central Avenue Laundry, the closed Rex Cleaners, and an unidentified source at the intersection of Minnesota Avenue and 23rd Streets.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The site consists of an 860-acre chlorinated solvent groundwater plume that underlies residential, commercial, and school buildings resulting in the potential for vapor intrusion. The contaminated groundwater contains chlorinated solvents, including PCE and TCE. In addition to the contaminated groundwater, the site includes soils contaminated with chlorinated solvents at the source areas.  
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Over 1,500 structures that serve as residences, businesses, and schools are vulnerable to vapor intrusion. Only a limited number of these structures have been sampled. Of the 49 structures where indoor air has been sampled, indoor air sampling results at 39 of these structures indicated vapor intrusion is occurring. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
In 2007, the EPA conducted a removal action that included removing and disposing of contaminated soil at 715 Central Avenue; injecting chemicals to help reduce groundwater contamination; and installing a barrier wall around the most highly contaminated groundwater. The EPA also installed vapor mitigation systems at seven structures overlying the groundwater plume near Big Sky Linen. Since that time, the EPA has been documenting plume characteristics and evaluating health risks due to vapor intrusion into structures overlying the plume. 
In 2019, the Montana Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) completed a remedial investigation at the site that determined the nature and extent of groundwater contamination, whether other sources were contributing to contamination, and if vapor intrusion was occurring. Results found that multiple sources of contaminated soil are continuing to contaminate groundwater and vapor intrusion was still occurring. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Montana referred the site to the EPA because no other viable options for funding the long- term remediation  
are available. Other f ederal and state cleanup  programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The EPA r eceived 
a le
tter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description 
may change as 
additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or 
subsequent FR no
tices.]  
For more 
information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure 
to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs  can be found 
on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telepho ne at 1-8 00-C DC-I NFO or 1 -800-2 32-4 636.
