NPL Site Narrative for BioClinical
Laboratories, Inc.
 
BIOCLINICAL LABORATORIES, INC.
Bohemia, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : BioClinical Laboratories, Inc., formulated and mixed organic and
inorganic chemicals for repackaging and distribution in Bohemia, Suffolk County, New York, from 1978 to
1981. The company occupied one 3,000-square-foot unit of a 10-unit one-story brick building.
 
Drums used for mixing chemicals were washed for reuse; the rinse water was routinely dumped down
sink drains or directly onto the ground. Leaking drums containing hazardous wastes were stored outdoors
for long periods of time, according to Suffolk County. After receiving complaints, the Suffolk County
Department of Health investigated and sampled surface water, storm drains, sanitary drains, and leaching
pools on the site. The Health Department detected high levels of organic solvents and heavy metals,
chloroform at particularly high levels. In November 1981, five months after the highest level of chloroform
was confirmed, the Health Department ordered the company to pump out a septic tank and pool.
 
In August 1981, the county issued a Consent Order to BioClinical Laboratories, citing several violations,
including improperly storing hazardous materials, discharging materials in excess of ground water
standards, and not possessing a permit under the State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
The company has not installed monitoring wells, as requested by the Health Department. BioClinical
Laboratories abandoned the site following a fire in July 1981. The site is currently occupied by the
American Flagpole Division of Kearney National Co.
 
One well in the Suffolk County Water Authority's Locust Avenue Well Field is within 0.5 mile of the site.
The well taps the contaminated aquifer, which is the sole source of drinking water for about 11,000 people
within 3 miles of the site.
 
Rattlesnake Brook, which is used for recreational activities, is within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
