 
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Proposed Site*** March 2015 
BJAT LLC  Franklin , Massachusetts   
 Norfolk County  
 Site Location: 
BJAT LLC is an approximately 18.3-acre property located at 300 Fisher Street in Franklin, Norfolk County , Massachusetts. 
 
 Site History: 
Beginning in the late 1800s the BJAT LLC property was used for industrial operations including the manufacture o f rubber and plastic products. The property has not been active since 1985.   The current owner of the site has conducted four environmental investigations from 2005 to 2012. These include an Environmental Site Assessment in 2005; a Subsurface Investigation in 2007; a Site Inspection in 2008 and a Comprehensive Site Assessment in 2012. Previous investigations have found pr ocess waste and debris containing hazardous substances including metals and semi -volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) at concentrations above applicable state standards.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Lead, mercury and zinc, as well as a number of SVOCs are contaminating the soil, sediment and ground water. Over the years manufacturing activity has left areas of process waste and debris on the property . 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
A town of Franklin public water supply well is located l ess than ½ mile from the property. There is also a town beach within one mile. Contamination has migrated to  surrounding wetlands and surface water sediments.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
The entire site has been fenced to discourage trespassers. Additional fencing has been constructed in areas identified as posing an elevated hazard due to high levels of metals and SVOCs in soils and sediments.  
 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The commonwealth of Massachusetts referred the site to the EPA because the contaminated ground water plume is affecting nearby properties and wetlands , and contamination on the property poses a hazard to people that may come in contact with soil and debris. Other cleanup approaches were considered, but are not viable at this time because of the extent of contamination. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.  See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, pleas e see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSD R or 1-888-422-8737.
 
