NPL Site Narrative for Bonneville Power
Administration Ross Complex (USDOE)
 
BONNEVILLE POWER ADMINISTRATION ROSS COMPLEX
(USDOE)
Vancouver, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) Ross Complex has
occupied approximately 200 acres in a residential area in Clark County north of Vancouver, Washington,
since 1939. It became part of the U.S. Department of Energy (USDOE) when the department was
established. Ross Complex serves as the control center for generation and transmission of electricity
throughout the Pacific Northwest.
 
According to a preliminary assessment made in 1986 by BPA, a number of storage and disposal areas
pose a potential threat, including: DOB-1 Drainfield, where laboratory wastes were deposited; the Cold
Creek Fill Area, where soil potentially contaminated with oil, PCBs, and heavy metals was disposed of; and
the Fog Chamber Disposal Area, where capacitors containing PCBs were buried in trenches.
 
In 1987 and 1988, BPA sampled an on-site well; analyses detected chloroform, 1,1-dichloroethane, and
1,1,1-trichloroethane. An estimated 105,000 people in Vancouver obtain drinking water from public wells
within 3 miles of the site.
 
Cold Creek is 450 feet downslope of the site. It is fed by shallow ground water that flows under the Ross
Complex. Vancouver Lake, 1.5 miles from Cold Creek, is used for fishing and other recreational activities.
 
In June 1988, USDOE completed a site inspection of the Ross Complex.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : BPA is selecting a contractor to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
