 
   
   
  
   
    
   
   
 
 
     
   
  
 
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** April 2009 
BORIT ASBESTOS Ambler, Pennsylvania Montgomery County 
àSite Location: The BoRit Asbestos site is located in Ambler, Montgom ery County, Pennsylvania. 
´Site History: The BoRit Asbestos site was used to dispose of asbestos containing material (ACM) from Keasby & Mattison Company, a nearby asbestos products manufacturing plant.  Nicolet Industries purchased the plant in 1962. Disposal at the site began in the 1930s and continued until the 1970s when Nicolet ceased operations. The site is divided into three contiguous parcels: an asbestos waste pile owned by Kane-Core, Inc., a reservoir owned by the Wissahickon Waterfowl Preserve, and a former park/playground owned by Whitpain Township. The waste pile is estimated to be 149,500 cubic yards and comprises 6 acres.  The second disposal area is a 15-acre reservoir whose berm was constructed of asbestos shingles, millboard, and soil.  As bestos product waste, such as piping and tiles, is visible surrounding the reservoir and the nearby stream banks.  The third disposal area is an area of approximately 11 acres and was used as a park/playground for a number of years.  In the mid-1980s, the area was fenced due to asbestos contamination. 
rSite Contamination/Contaminants: Asbestos is the contaminant of concern.      
vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Asbestos was detected in air samp
les collected in the vicinity of the asbestos disposal areas.  The area surrounding the site is densely populated and includes residential and commercia l use.  Although the waste pile and playground area were covered with soil at the time of closure, asbestos is present at the surface throughout the site.  The site is not completely fenced, and there is evidence of trespassers using the property.  ACM has also been observed along the banks of the Wissahickon Creek, Rose Valley Creek and Tannery Run.  These three areas are publicly accessible. 
3Response Activities (to date): Wa
rning signs have been posted and a fence has been constructed around portions of the site.  The boundary of the site along Wissahickon Creek is not fenced.  
}Need for NPL Listing: The site is being considered for the NPL because of the potential exposure of the nearby residential population to airborne asbestos and ACM along the banks of Wi
ssahickon Creek, Rose Valley Creek and Tannery Run.  Applicable federal and commonwealth cleanup programs were evaluated.  It was determined that NPL listing provides the best approach to address all of the sources of contamination to protect human health and the environment at the site.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.      
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
