NPL Site Narrative for Bountiful/Woods
Cross 5th South PCE Plume
 
BOUNTIFUL/WOODS CROSS 5TH SOUTH PCE PLUME
Bountiful, Woods Cross, Utah
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (December 1, 2000) : The Bountiful/Woods Cross 5th South PCE Plume site is
located from approximately 500 S to 400 N, and from 500 to 1100 West in Bountiful, West Bountiful, and
Woods Cross, Davis County, Utah. The site is bounded by private residences and agricultural land on the
west, commercial properties and residences to the south, industrial sites and residential properties to the
north, and interstate highway, railroad tracks, and commercial properties progressively farther east.
 
The Bountiful/Woods Cross 5th South PCE Plume site consists of a contaminated ground water
plume in the East Shore Aquifer. The areal extent of contaminated ground water is approximately 245
acres. The vertical extent is unknown, but may be over 100 feet deep, based on detected quantities of
tetrachloroethylene (PCE) from depths as shallow as 24 feet, and as deep as 150 feet. There are four
residential wells subject to PCE contamination at levels above health-based benchmarks. Approximately
5,900 wells have been constructed in the East Shore Aquifer with private and municipal wells servicing
a population of over 45,000 within a four-mile radius of the site. No definitive source has been identified
because sampling and analytical data collected to date are not adequate to document and quantify waste
sources. The extent of the plume has been identified by data from permanent monitoring and residential
wells.
 
Detections of PCE and trichloroethene (TCE) in the ground water at this site were first noted in 1986. An
investigation in May 1987 was conducted at the Woods Cross Phillips 66 Refinery to attempt to identify
potential sources of PCE. Elevated levels of PCE were detected both upgradient and downgradient of the
refinery.
 
In 1996, the EPA conducted quarterly sampling of residential wells downgradient or cross-gradient from
the contaminated wells discovered by Phillips. EPA also attempted to characterize the nature and extent of
the contamination through subsurface soil gas and ground water sampling. EPA also sampled permanent
residential wells. Four of the residential wells sampled were found to contain elevated levels of PCE. The
households were notified and were supplied with bottled drinking water until permanent connections to the
municipal water supply were made in February 1997.
 
In 1996, the Utah Department of Environmental Quality (UDEQ) conducted a preliminary assessment of
the site and identified several potential sources, including dry cleaners, a waste oil refinery, automotive
maintenance facilities, and an oil refinery. The main route of exposure identified in the PA is ground water.
 
In September and October 1998, UDEQ conducted a site investigation focused on identifying the potential
sources of PCE upgradient of the site. UDEQ collected five ground water samples. A definitive source of
the PCE was not identified.
 
Annual sampling conducted during August 2000 by Phillips Petroleum Company downgradient of the
Phillips Refinery showed TCE and PCE at elevated levels in three monitoring wells.
 
The latest sampling conducted at this site occurred in September 2000 and was performed by EPA.
Analytical results of samples taken from permanent monitoring wells and domestic wells confirmed the
presence of PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride and other contaminants at elevated levels.
 
Status (September 2001) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
