OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST  (NPL)   
*** NPL Site*** March 2022 
BRADFORD  ISLAND Cascade Locks, Oregon Multnomah County 
 
 Site Location: The Bradford Island site, owned and operated by the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), is located within the  Bonneville Dam complex on Bradford Island within the Columbia River at river mile (RM) 146.1, approximately 40 miles east of Portland, Oregon. The site is comprised of two Operable Units (OUs): the Upland OU located on Bradford Island (approximately 22 acres covering the eastern half of the island), which contains four known areas of concern; and the River OU adjacent to the Upland OU (approximately 240 acres), which contains areas of sediments contaminated by in-water disposal of electrical equipment and upland sources.   Site History: Upland and in-water disposal activities have resulted in contamination of onsite soil and ground water, as well as the  sediments, fish and clams in the Columbia  River. In 2000 and 2001, discarded electrical equipment and debris were  discovered in the Columbia River immediately north of Bradford Island. USACE removed old equipment in the early 2000s and the most contaminated sediments in 2007. No additional cleanup work has been conducted since 2007,  however, additional investigations have been conducted including a remedial investigation (RI) completed in 2012.  Site Contamination/Contaminants: Hazardous substances found in the Upland OU include butyltins, herbicides, metals, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),  pesticides, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), semi -volatile organic compounds (SVOCs), and volatile organic  compounds (VOCs). Contaminants found in the River OU include PCBs and a variety of other hazardous substances.  Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Upland OU sources and contaminated sediments in the River OU present significant risks to human health through direct exposure or consumption via the food chain, as well as risks to threatened and endangered species and wildlife habitat.  In 2013, both the Oregon Health Authority and the Washington Department of Health issued fish consumption advisories for resident fish species in the Columbia River above Bonneville Dam due to elevated levels of mercury and PCBs in  fish tissue. The River OU lies within a treaty fishing area for several federally recognized tribes.  Response Activities (to date): 
 
Assessment and cleanup activities for the site have been conducted by the USACE including initial upland assessments  (1997), removal of PCB-containing equipment (2002) and PCB-contaminated sediment (2007) from within the Columbia River, the RI for both OUs (2012), human health and ecological risk assessments for both OUs (2016), and an Upland  OU Feasibility Study (2017).  Need for NPL Listing: The state of Oregon referred the site to the EPA because high concentrations of contaminants in fish tissue, clams,  sediments and upland sources pose an ongoing threat to human health and the environment. NPL listing is needed to  provide an enforceable and expeditious timeline for investigation, analysis and remedial  cleanup through a Federal Facility Agreement. The work that has been performed by USACE since the late 1990s has not resulted in remedial  cleanup. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the Oregon Department of  Environmental Quality, the Washington Department of Ecology, and the Yakama Nation. 
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR  notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs 
can be found 
on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
