NPL Site Narrative for Brantley Landfill
 
BRANTLEY LANDFILL
Island, Kentucky
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Brantley Landfill covers 4 acres on the west side of Island,
McLean County, Kentucky. In 1979, Doug Brantley & Sons, Inc., received a State solid waste permit for
disposal of secondary dross (a by-product of aluminum recycling) from Barmet Aluminum Corp.'s smelter in
Livia, Kentucky. According to Barmet, the Brantley Landfill contains 250,000 tons of aluminum dross. Dross
contains heavy metals (including barium, cadmium, chromium, lead, copper, and manganese) and reacts
violently with water to form several gases, including ammonia. The landfill closed in October 1980.
 
The Kentucky Division of Air Pollution Control (KDAPC) has received numerous complaints of ammonia
odor from residents in the area. EPA detected ammonia in the air around the site during an inspection in
December 1986. KDAPC has cited Doug Brantley & Sons for odor and dust emissions from this facility.
Approximately 60 persons live within 0.25 mile of the site and could be affected by release of contaminants
into the air.
 
The waste was deposited below the water table, thus threatening ground water. An estimated 2,000 people
obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site. A private well is 2,600 feet
from the site.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : Barmet contested the proposed listing of the site and filed a civil action
against EPA and the State on November 8, 1988 in the U.S. District Court. In November 1988, Barmet also
filed for a Temporary Restraining Order to (1) keep EPA from placing this site and the Fort Howard Coal
Co., Inc., Stone Quarry on the final NPL until their comments had been addressed and (2) keep EPA from
sending letters to other parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the sites informing them
of their potential liability. After the request for this order was denied, EPA sent the letters.
 
On January 10, 1990, EPA and Barmet signed an Administrative Order on Consent under CERCLA
Sections 104(a)(1) and 122(d)(3). Under this order and with EPA oversight, Barmet will conduct a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
