NPL Site Narrative for Breslube-Penn, Inc
 
BRESLUBE-PENN, INC
Coraopolis, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 1995) : The Breslube-Penn Inc. site is located on Montour Road in
Coraopolis, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. The property is approximately 5 acres in size and has been
inactive since late 1991. Five sources were identified at the site: storage tanks, staged contaminated
waste, a filter cake disposal area, a waste pile, and a backfilled lagoon.
 
In the mid-1970s, American Tallow and Wiseman Oil Companies conducted operations at the site.
American Tallow operated a meat-rendering business and discontinued operations at the facility around
1977. Wiseman Oil Company operated a waste oil processing and reclamation facility at the site. Used oils
were re-refined into fuel oils and sold to residual fuel users. Wiseman Oil also manufactured lubricating
oil from the used oils for a short period of time during its operation of the facility. A filtering agent clay
was generated as a residue from the filter during this process. The filter cake was stockpiled in the
southwestern portion of the property. In February 1981, sampling of accumulated sludge material within
the diked areas surrounding the on-site oil storage tanks indicated elevated levels of PCBs. Wiseman Oil
and American Tallow had operated a lagoon in the southwestern end of the property. Oily plating waste
from a Westinghouse plant in New Jersey was allegedly disposed in this lagoon. Runoff from the lagoon
and spillage onto the ground throughout the property caused ground water contamination. The lagoon
was backfilled in 1979 but the waste was not removed from the lagoon. Breslube-Penn Inc. acquired the
property and facility in 1982 after Wiseman Oil declared bankruptcy. Breslube-Penn continued waste oil
reprocessing operations. The company built tanks on the former location of Wiseman's lagoon and also
constructed a lubricating oil reprocessing plant. The filter cake from this operation was generally collected
in a roll-off box and disposed both off and on site. Breslube-Penn discontinued fuel oil reprocessing in
1986. The facility was utilized as a waste oil transfer station from 1986 through late 1991 when operations
at the facility ceased. Three tanks were installed for use in oil transferring operations.
 
A sampling site inspection was conducted at the facility in October 1988. Samples collected from
the staged contaminated soil area, the filter cake area, and other areas on site revealed elevated
concentrations of volatile and semivolatile organic compounds (SVOCs), PCBs, and several inorganic
compounds, including cyanide. Downgradient ground water samples contained volatile and semivolatile
contaminants and PCBs. Samples collected from the two on-site wells indicated elevated levels of VOCs.
The site also threatens municipal drinking water wells.
 
Prior to July 1990, Breslube-Penn excavated and collected the formerly staged contaminated wastes
into a large pile located in the western section of the property. Material from a 12- by 50-foot portion of
the filter cake area was removed and also staged in the large waste pile. The waste pile reportedly had
no liner or cover. An expanded site inspection was conducted in April 1991. Samples collected from
the waste pile and from the former staged contaminated waste area revealed elevated levels of VOCs,
SVOCs, PCBs, metals, and cyanide. Samples from the former filter cake area contained concentrations of
several hazardous substances. Several inorganic contaminants were detected in sediment collected from a
drainage pipe from the site into Montour Run.
 
Status (June 1996) : A waste pile containing over 5,000 tons of PCB-contaminated material has been
removed. Test pits indicate that subsurface material is at least as contaminated as the pile. The Agency
for Toxic Substance and Disease Registry recommends more sampling in the area of the filter cake piles,
removing a storage tank, and installing additional fences. Screening for VOCs is tentatively planned for
Spring 1996.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
