OLEM/OSRTIWashington, DC 20460
NATIONAL RIORITIES IST P L (NPL) 
***Proposed NPL Site*** March 2022 
BRILLO LANDFILL Victory, New York Cayuga County 
Site Location:
The Brillo Landfill (Brillo) site is an inactive hazardous waste disposal facility located along Route 370, Victory, Cayuga County, New York. The site is situated in central New York, within the Finger Lakes region.  
 Site History: 
Brillo is an inactive hazardous waste disposal facility that accepted industrial and sanitary wastes from approximately 1962 to 1986. The facility received industrial wastewater treatment plant sludge from 1962 to 1969 and paint sludge from 1968 to 1969, both from a nearby automotive electroplating facility. Beginning in the 1960s, facility operations included transport, storage, and disposal of waste-filled drums containing sludge and chlorinated solvents . Brillo also received polishing compound, sewage sludge, and waste grain from commercial food production during the 1980s. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
Sampling by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) indicates that current and former waste disposal units and surrounding soil are contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs ); semivolatile organic compounds (SVOCs), including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH s); polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs); and inorganic constituents including chromium, lead, copper, mercury, and nickel. NYSDEC sampling in June 2021 indicates that PCBs, inorganic constituents, and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in the form of perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) are present in the adjacent wetland at levels above background. PFAS are attributable to the sludge and sanitary wastes deposited at the facility. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The adjacent wetland is contaminated with PCBs, inorganic constituents, and PFAS. The wetland is contiguous with Little Sodus Creek, which runs through additional wetlands that are affected by releases from the site. NYSDEC groundwater sampling results from 2016, 2017, and 2019 show concentrations of site -related hazardous substances (i.e., VOCs, PCBs, and PFAS) in facility monitoring wells at levels above background. Although NYSDEC sampling of private drinking water wells within 1 mile of the site in 2018 indicated that the groundwater release ha d not yet migrated to any of the drinking water wells, potential contamination in the future is possible. The nearest of these drinking water wells is approximately 0.2 mile southeast of site waste sources. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
In response to an NYSDEC request for assistance , the EPA conducted a removal action at the site from June 2018 through April 2019. During the removal action, approximately 2,018 drums were recovered, overpacked, and processed by removing hazardous substances and crushing the drums. The total amount of waste managed and shipped off-site included 7,944 gallons of liquid waste, 782 tons of impacted soil, 520 yd
3 of debris (drum carcasses, etc.), and 14 tons of other solids. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of New York referred the site to the EPA because soil and sediment contaminated with VOCs, SVOCs, PCBs, metals, and PFAS requires cleanup to protect human health and the environment . Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing the site on  the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to  these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/ index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
