NPL Site Narrative for Brio Refining, Inc.
 
BRIO REFINING, INC.
Friendswood, Texas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Brio Refining, Inc., Site is an abandoned refinery at
2501 Dixie Farm Road in Harris County south of Houston near Friendswood, Texas. The area is heavily
populated. A housing development borders the site on the north.
 
The site consists of approximately 12 closed pits on 50 acres of land. Tanks and processing facilities
remain on a portion of the site. The facility was operated from the late 1950s to December 1982. Earlier
operations carried out at the site included copper catalyst regeneration, oil blending and refining, and
hydrocarbon (styrene) cracking. Previous owners or operators of the facility have included Hard Lowe
Chemical, Lowe Chemical, Phoenix Chemical, JOC Oil Aromatics, and Friendswood Refining.
 
Spills have entered nearby Mud Gulley and subsequently, via Clear Creek, Galveston Bay. A recent
inspection by EPA indicated that shallow ground water is potentially contaminated with copper, vinyl
chloride, fluorene, styrene, and ethylbenzene. In January 1984, EPA detected toluene, benzene, and other
aromatic organic chemicals in the air.
 
Status (January 1986) : Some of the parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site
have organized into the Brio Task Force. On June 27, 1985, 14 members of the Task Force signed
an Administrative Order on Consent with EPA to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
Initial field work began in May 1985. It included a large-scale biological treatment study and incineration
demonstration study.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : The Record of Decision, signed on March 31, 1988, by EPA, the State, and the
Brio Task Force, identified on-site incineration as the preferred remedial action. The Task Force proposed
biological treatment instead. EPA will consider biological treatment if the Task Force demonstrates that
it can meet EPA's criteria. Studies to demonstrate that biological treatment can meet EPA criteria were
completed in the fall of 1988. EPA is reviewing the Task Force report on the studies.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
