NPL Site Narrative for Brook Industrial
Park
 
BROOK INDUSTRIAL PARK
Bound Brook, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Brook Industrial Park is a 4.5-acre complex of light
industries and warehouses on the north banks of the Raritan River in a heavily industrialized area in the
Borough of Bound Brook, Somerset County, New Jersey. The park is bordered by the Central Railroad of
New Jersey, Lehigh Valley Railroad, and residential areas.
 
The facility dates to the late 1800s. Industrial, chemical, and pesticide operations began in 1971 when Blue
Spruce Chemical began formulating pesticides that were banned in the United States and could only be
exported. Blue Spruce stored Agent Orange, which contains traces of dioxin, on the site. Blue Spruce's
building has been abandoned. Other occupants of buildings at the park include Jame Fine Chemicals, Inc.,
which manufactures specialty chemicals, and National Metal Finishings Corp., which plates metals. Both
have operated at the park for 10-12 years within 50 feet of one another.
 
The Middlebrook Regional Health Commission and the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) investigated the site when workers became ill. Several of the operations were cited for
inadequate housekeeping and waste disposal practices.
 
Soils on the site and wells on and downgradient of the site contain solvents, pesticides, and heavy metals,
according to EPA and NJDEP tests. Public and private wells within 3 miles of the site provide water to
an estimated 613,000 people. A private well is within 0.25 mile of the site. The materials that Jame Fine,
National Metal, and Blue Spruce used or processed have been mixed and have migrated to ground water.
Also, a sewer carrying Jame Fine's process waste water to the Middlesex County Sewerage Authority once
broke, contaminating the Blue Spruce property.
 
EPA and NJDEP detected lindane and aldrin in surface water on the site and run-off to the Raritan River.
Nearby surface water is used for recreational activities.
 
In July 1983, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to seal and lock the Blue Spruce building and cap
the dioxin area with asphalt. However, workers in the rest of the park can come into direct contact with
hazardous substances.
 
Jame Fine illegally discharged cooling water used in the manufacture of mandelic acid to the Raritan River,
according to an Administrative Consent Order filed in March 1980 by NJDEP. In August 1985, NJDEP cited
National Metal and Brook Industrial Park for unpermitted discharges of metal plating waste into ground
water during 1977-87.
 
This facility is being proposed for the NPL because National Metal is classified as a non- or late-filer under
Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Although the company was treating,
storing, or disposing of hazardous waste after November 19, 1980, it did not file a Part A permit application
by that date as required and has little or no history of compliance with RCRA Subtitle C.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : In June 1989, EPA completed a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
In mid-July 1989, EPA sent notice letters to parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the
site informing them of their potential liability.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
