NPL Site Narrative for Bruin Lagoon
 
BRUIN LAGOON
Bruin Borough, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : Bruin Lagoon covers about 4 acres adjacent to the western bank
of the South Branch of Bear Creek in a highly industrialized narrow valley in Bruin Borough, Butler County,
Pennsylvania. Homes adjoin the site. Bruin Lagoon is approximately 7 stream miles above where Bear
Creek meets the Allegheny River, an important water supply source for many industries and communities,
including Pittsburgh. The site consists of: (1) a 1-acre open sludge lagoon contained by a 22-foot earthen
dike, (2) a 2-acre closed lagoon, (3) an effluent pond, (4) abandoned storage tanks and equipment, and (5)
an area of contaminated soil on adjacent private property. The wastes on-site are primarily from the white
oil manufacturing industry. They contain sulfuric acid, heavy metals, and other materials. Contamination of
ground water, surface water, and air has been documented. Failure of the dike containing the open lagoon
is the foremost concern.
 
In September 1981, $300,000 was made available under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act for
a remedial investigation to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site, for a feasibility study
to identify alternatives for remedial action, and for design of the cost-effective remedy selected.
 
Status (July 1983) : The feasibility study, completed in February 1982, calls for: removing the liquid floating
on top of the open lagoon and disposing of it off-site, containing the remaining wastes on-site, stabilizing
the lagoons and dikes, building a channel to prevent ground water from entering the site, and covering the
site with an impermeable multilayer cap.
 
In September 1982, EPA signed a $3,073,000 Superfund State Contract with Pennsylvania for
implementation of the remedial action. The work will be managed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Another $58,000 for additional studies was approved in December 1982. The corps advertised for bids
in late May 1983. Construction is expected to begin in late summer and is scheduled to be completed in
mid-1984.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
