NPL Site Narrative for Brunswick Naval Air
Station
 
BRUNSWICK NAVAL AIR STATION
Brunswick, Maine
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Brunswick Naval Air Station, in Brunswick, Sagadahoc
County, Maine, encompasses seven areas that were used in the past (beginning in 1942) for the storage
or disposal of hazardous wastes. These areas are within a 2-mile radius and occupy a total of at least 15
acres. Of the seven areas, two were used for landfilling the station's household and office wastes. The
other areas were used for disposal of acid, caustic, and asbestos wastes. Pesticides, solvents, and waste
oils present on the site threaten ground water (including a nearby public well field serving 18,000 people),
surface water, and adjacent wetlands.
 
The Brunswick Naval Air Station is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established
in 1978. Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up
contamination from hazardous materials. The Navy has identified the potential threats to human health
or the environment caused by past practices at the seven areas, and in 1984 will start a study to further
identify the contaminants present at the site and determine their migration paths.
 
EPA intends to monitor future work at Brunswick and provide technical assistance to the Navy as needed.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The Navy completed the Site Verification Stage of the Installation Restoration
Program, which is the first phase of a multiphase program. EPA will continue to monitor work at Brunswick
and provide technical assistance as needed.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
