NPL Site Narrative for Brunswick Wood
Preserving
 
BRUNSWICK WOOD PRESERVING
Brunswick, Georgia
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (December 1996) : Brunswick Wood Preserving is located on Perry Lane Road in
Brunswick, Glynn County, Georgia. The site is bordered by Burnett Creek to the west and south, and the
urban population of Brunswick to the north and east. The property is comprised of approximately 50 acres.
The remaining land portion of the property contains process buildings, administration offices, railroad
spurs, treatment, storage and disposal units, and tank storage facilities.
 
Brunswick Wood Preserving was opened in 1958 as the Escambia Treating Company. In July 1986 the
entire property, except for a small adjacent property and one surface impoundment (parcels 24 and 25),
was sold to the Brunswick Treating Company. Both owners of the site manufactured wooden poles and
pilings. The site operated until March 1991.
 
Brunswick Wood Preserving operated as a wood preserving plant on a previously virgin site
for approximately 31 years. Operations included treating logs with creosote and solutions of
pentachlorophenate dissolved in an oil carrier. In 1974 a State water quality official reported the company
was exclusively using solutions of pentachlorophenate dissolved in diesel oil to treat the wood. The
solution mixed with diesel or creosote creates a 5% PCP and 95% carrier solution. Prior to mixing, PCP is
85-95% pure. The remaining ingredients include tetrachlorophenol, other chlorophenols, and dioxin/furans.
Contaminants found on and off site are consistent with those at similar operations.
 
The EPA Region 4 Emergency Response and Removal Branch began work on the Brunswick Wood
Preserving site in April of 1991. During this investigation several samples were found to contain extremely
high levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and dioxin. During the week of June 20, 1993,
EPA Region 4 conducted a field sampling investigation at Brunswick Wood Preserving. Environmental
sampling consisted of nine surface soil, three subsurface soil, 11 sediment, and five ground water samples.
Creosote constituents, dioxin, and metals were all found on site. The same study revealed extremely high
levels of creosote constituents in the sediment of Burnett Creek.
 
Two City of Brunswick wells are located within a 4-mile radius of the site, as well as all four Glynn County
North Mainland water supply wells. These six wells serve a total of 6,253 persons. All wells are drilled into
the deep aquifer. Several private potable wells are also located within a 4-mile radius of the site.
 
Runoff from the site flows off the western edge of the facility through drainage ditches into Burnett Creek.
Burnett Creek merges with Cowpen Creek 3.41 miles downstream. Cowpen Creek flows an additional
0.47 mile before emptying into the Turtle River, which flows approximately 9.7 miles before emptying into
the Brunswick River. Wetlands bound the majority of the surface water pathway, which is inhabited by
numerous endangered species.
 
Status (April 1997) : The first phase of the remedial investigation was conducted by EPA Region 4 from
February 24 through March 7, 1997. Soil, surface water, sediment, and ground water samples were taken
both on site and off site. Significant visual contamination still remains on site, particularly in the excavated
lagoon areas where ground water was encountered before all of the contaminated soil could be removed.
A second phase is anticipated later this year to further characterize the geology and to collect additional
ground water samples.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
