NPL Site Narrative for Buckingham
County Landfill
 
BUCKINGHAM COUNTY LANDFILL
Buckingham, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : The Buckingham County Landfill covers 8 acres in a rural area
near the town of Buckingham, Buckingham County, Virginia.
 
This site was originally proposed for listing under the name "Love's Container Service Landfill."
 
Love's Container Service operated the landfill from 1962 until February 1982. In 1972, the Virginia State
Health Department issued the facility a permit to dispose of municipal waste. The permit was modified in
1977 to allow disposal of chemical wastes generated by the local furniture-making industry. In 1979, the
portion of the landfill receiving the chemical waste was closed.
 
In 1981, the facility received Interim Status as a hazardous waste disposal facility under Subtitle C of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) by filing Part A of a permit application. Subsequently,
the facility accepted 1,254 drums of used organic solvents and flammable liquids/solids. These wastes
were placed in trenches separated from the previously closed portion of the site.
 
After purchasing the landfill from Love's Container Service in April 1982, Buckingham County closed the
new portion in accordance with State regulations but not with RCRA Subtitle C requirements.
 
Sampling conducted by EPA in September 1983 indicates that on-site ground water and off-site residential
wells are contaminated by chromium and beryllium. In early 1985, one residential well was found to be
contaminated. About 1,100 people depend on wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
Status (January 1986) : On November 8, 1985, the landfill's Interim Status was terminated under
RCRA Section 3005(e)(2) because the county had failed to submit a Part B permit application for
postclosure monitoring and did not certify compliance with applicable ground water monitoring and financial
responsibility requirements.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : EPA is proposing to place this previously proposed RCRA site on the NPL
because it has lost Interim Status (and hence authority to operate) and because Buckingham County has
stated it is unwilling and financially unable to clean up all the contamination at the site.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has placed this site on the NPL.
 
EPA's plans for 1990 call for: (1) conducting a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site; and (2) starting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and
extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
