NPL Site Narrative for Burgess Brothers
Landfill
 
BURGESS BROTHERS LANDFILL
Woodford, Vermont
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Burgess Brothers Landfill covers 60 acres in Woodford,
Bennington County, Vermont. The area is sparsely populated, much of the land being part of the Green
Mountain National Forest. Burgess Brothers Construction Co. of Bennington operated the facility as a
sand pit, salvage yard, and dump between the 1940s and 1976. The abandoned site is still owned by the
Burgess family.
 
Under an agreement with Burgess, Union Carbide Corp.'s Bennington Plant used the landfill to dispose of
wastes from the manufacture of battery products. Union Carbide disposed of an unknown quantity of lead
sludge at the landfill during 1956-71, and during 1971-76 the company poured the equivalent of 47,780
drums of wastes containing lead, mercury, tetrachloroethylene, and other hazardous chemicals into unlined
settling lagoons adjacent to the bank of the sand pit.
 
According to the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation (VT DEC) (April 1984) and a
consultant to Union Carbide (July 1985), soils, ground water, and surface water on and downgradient
of the site are contaminated with heavy metals and volatile organic compounds, including vinyl chloride,
trichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene.
 
Public and private wells within 3 miles of the site supply drinking water to an estimated 13,900 people.
The nearest well is 2,200 feet west of the lagoons. Morgan Spring, which is regularly used as a secondary
supply for the Bennington municipal system, is 1.5 miles to the west.
 
Barney Brook and the Waloomsic River are within 3 miles downstream of the site. Both are used for
recreational activities. A fresh water wetland is 0.3 stream mile from the site.
 
Access to the site is unrestricted, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with
hazardous substances.
 
VT DEC is negotiating with Union Carbide Corp. and Burgess Brothers Construction Co. to undertake a
more extensive study of the hydrology and migration of contaminants from the site.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
