NPL Site Narrative for Burlington Northern
(Brainerd/Baxter)
 
BURLINGTON NORTHERN (BRAINERD/BAXTER)
Baxter, Brainerd, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : Burlington Northern (BN) preserves railroad ties with creosote on a
70-acre site in the Brainerd/Baxter area of Minnesota. Waste water and sludges from the process have
been discharged to on-site ponds since the plant's construction in 1907. The original pond was abandoned
in the 1930s and covered. A second pond has been used since that time. Both probably lack any natural
or constructed seal. The second pond covers about 2 acres and contains 3 feet of sludge on top of an
unknown quantity of contaminated soil. Several exploratory borings confirm the existence of sludge and/
or contaminated soil in the area of the original pond. On-site ground water is contaminated by a number of
polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons. The State sampled a number of area wells, most of which are north or
west of the site, while ground water flows to the southeast from the site. No drinking water wells appear to
be contaminated as yet, although the Mississippi River may be receiving contaminated ground water.
 
Status (July 1983) : BN stopped discharging into the second pond in late 1982. The company also started
a ground water investigation on-site, then expanded it at the request of the State to include off-site areas
between the plant and the Mississippi River. BN is also investigating methods by which to remove and
dispose of or treat sludges and contaminated soils, and recently hired a consultant to begin a remedial
investigation to determine the extent of contamination at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
