OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May 2018 
BURLINGTON INDUSTRIES CHERAW Cheraw, South Carolina Chesterfield County 
Site Location:The Burlington Industries Cheraw site includes a textile manufacturing plant and approximately 3.2 miles of surface water drainage from the facility to the Great Pee Dee River. The facility is located at 650 Chesterfield Highway in Cheraw, South Carolina. It is located in an urban environment with numerous residential properties located adjacent to the surface water pathway.  Site History: The Burlington Industries Cheraw site is an active textile manufacturing plant that began operations in 1960 as a manufacturer of fiberglass textiles and, later, specialty fabrics such as Kevlar®. The facility was sold to Highland Industries in 1988 and they continue to operate the plant. At one time, the plant utilized polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in the manufacturing process, likely as a fabric c oating for heat/flame resistance with other possible uses in synthetic resins, rubber, adhesives and de-dusting agents. Historically, on-site sludge drying beds were utilized in a pre -treatment system prior to releasing site wastewater to an adjacent ditch .  Site Contamination/Contaminants: Former operations at the facility caused a release of PCBs into a drainage ditch along the western side of the manufacturing facility, resulting in high levels of PCBs in the ditch and several residential yards along the ditch. Additionally, the deposition of the PCBs above Regional Screening Levels (RSLs) extends through a wetland to Wilson Branch, Huckleberry Branch and the Great Pee Dee River. A city park along the drainage pathway is also contaminated with PCB-laden sediment.  Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : PCBs above the RSLs have been found in residential yards, ditch/creek sediments and wetland areas downstream of the source area. The Great Pee Dee River is a recreational fishery. The s tate has issued a fish consumption advisory for the Great Pee Dee River due to PCBs. A Remedial Investigation is needed to determine the impacts to additional residential properties and wetlands downstream of the source area.  Response Activities (to date): Due to the elevated levels of PCBs found in residential properties and in a city park, the site was referred to the EPA’s removal program for consideration as a time -critical removal action. Contaminated soil is being removed to address the most highly impacted residential properties, along with the associated sections of the drainage ditch, and the city park. Further remedial action will be necessary to address source areas, surface water and additional residential properties .  Need for NPL Listing: The state of South Carolina referred the site to the EPA because of the high levels of PCB contamination in residential  properties and in downstream sediments. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at  this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notic es] For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
