NPL Site Narrative for Butz Landfill
 
BUTZ LANDFILL
Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Butz Landfill covers 13 acres along Township Route 601 (RD
#5) in Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pennsylvania. The area is rural; two large recreation areas are within
1 mile and a children's camp within 0.5 mile of the site.
 
The privately owned landfill operated during approximately 1970-75. In 1973, the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources (PA DER) denied the owner's application for a solid waste disposal permit.
The owner/operator kept no records regarding the amount or types of wastes deposited at the site.
However, the incomplete permit application lists garbage, mixed solids, and septic sludge as wastes to be
accepted.
 
In 1986, PA DER identified chlorobenzene, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, vinyl chloride, and trichloroethylene
(TCE) in ground water. A private well 1,700 feet east of the site contained 2,600 parts per billion of
TCE. Analyses conducted in 1979 also indicated elevated levels of chromium and mercury in drinking
water wells. In January 1987, EPA confirmed organic chemical contamination in more than 20 wells
downgradient of the site.
 
Ground water is the sole source of drinking water for residents in the region. An estimated 6,400 people
obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Surface run-off from the site appears to move toward an unnamed pond south of the site. Surface water is
used for recreational activities within 3 miles downstream of the site.
 
The site is not completely fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact
with hazardous substances.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is conducting a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site and will then negotiate with them to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
