NPL Site Narrative for C & D Recycling
 
C & D RECYCLING
Foster Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : The C & D Recycling Site covers approximately 50
acres in Foster Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania. From the 1960s to early 1980s, the company
incinerated lead-cased telephone cables or burned them in pits to melt off the lead and reclaim the
remaining copper wire.
 
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER) began to investigate the site after
detecting elevated lead levels in two nearby residential wells. Further ground water sampling throughout
the area confirmed the existence of a lead problem.
 
According to tests conducted by PA DER, high concentrations of lead and copper are present in the ash
piles, burn pit, and drainage pathway areas on the site. One off-site sample of surface soil also showed
high levels of lead. On-site ground water contains lead and copper, among other inorganic contaminants,
according to EPA and State tests. About 6,100 people within 3 miles of the site depend on public and
private wells as their source of drinking water. The nearest well is within 1,000 feet of the site.
 
The owner excavated some of the lead-containing material from the site under the supervision of PA DER
in 1985. PA DER also required C & D Recycling to submit a sampling plan to further assess conditions at
the site. The company did not submit the plan.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : In April 1986, EPA sampled 14 residential water wells near the C & D Recycling
Site. All samples were analyzed for lead, copper, arsenic, and cadmium. Arsenic and cadmium were not
detected in any wells. Trace concentrations of copper and lead, however, were found in many of the wells.
The concentrations were below EPA's drinking water standards except in one instance where elevated
levels of lead were found.
 
Late in August 1986, EPA issued notice letters to potentially responsible parties asking for voluntary
participation in the remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
EPA is negotiating a Consent Order with C&D Recycling for the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
