NPL Site Narrative for C & J Disposal
Leasing Co. Dump
 
C & J DISPOSAL LEASING CO. DUMP
Hamilton, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The C & J Disposal Leasing Co. Dump covers 0.1 acre in a rural
area south of the intersection of Route 12b and Route 46 and north of Hamilton, Madison County, New
York. On the west, the site borders a cornfield; a small marsh and pond are just south of the cornfield.
 
Approximately 10 years ago, C & J Leasing, a trucking firm from Paterson, New Jersey, began using the
abandoned railway bed adjacent to its property as an access road. The company dumped drums of lead-
based paints and other liquid wastes directly on the ground. The dumping area is owned by the New York
State Department of Transportation. The company also abandoned between 75 and 100 55-gallon drums
at the site.
 
In June 1986, EPA identified bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate in sediments in a pond 0.1 mile downstream of the
dump. A small stream runs through a marsh and connects the ponds to Woodman Pond, the municipal
reservoir for Hamilton Village, 0.5 mile downstream. The pond provides drinking water to an estimated
3,800 people.
 
EPA's June 1986 tests also identified bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate, fluoranthene, pyrene, chrysene and other
polyaromatic hydrocarbons, as well as lead, in on-site soil. Soils are highly permeable and ground water
shallow (10 feet in some cases), conditions that facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water. An
estimated 300 people obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
The dumping area is easily accessible, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct
contact with hazardous substances.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is preparing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
