 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs ca n be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2011 
CABO ROJO GROUND  WATER 
CONTAMINATION  Cabo Rojo , Puerto Rico  
  
 
 Site Location: 
The Cabo Rojo Ground Water Contamination site, which consists of a ground water plume with no identified source(s) of contamination, is located in the municipality of Cabo Rojo, in southwestern Puerto Rico.  
 Site History: 
Quarterly ground water samples collected by Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA) from 2002 to 2006 indicated the presence of tetrachloroethene (PCE) and trichloroethene (TCE) in public supply wells within the Cabo Rojo Urbano System, in particular the Ana Maria well .  Ground water samples collected by EPA in July 2006 and September 2009 confirmed the presence of PCE and TCE in the Ana Maria well .  In an effort to identify the source of contamination, from November 2006 through June 2007, EPA conducted site reconnaissance activities at 68  facilities and collected soil and ground water samples from 13 facilities.  Although EPA did not identify the source of ground water contamination in the public supply wells, chlorinated solvents were detected at three facilities : D’Elegant Fantastic Dry Cleaners, Extasy Q Prints, and Cabo Rojo Professional Dry Cleaners.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Chlorinated solvents (i.e., PCE, TCE, cis-1,2-dichloroethene, and 1,1-dichloroethene) are present in drinking water wells (i.e., Ana Maria and Club de Leones) in Cabo Rojo. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The Cabo Rojo Urbano public water system consists of six wells (Hacienda la Margarita, Cabo Rojo Pozo I, Cabo Rojo Pozo II, Cabo Rojo Pozo III, Club de Leones, and Ana Maria) serving  approximately 48,453 people.  The Ana Maria well acts as an independent system that serves approximately 1 ,856 persons, while the Club de Leones well is inter connected with the remaining wells.  The ground water contamination lies within a designated Wellhead Protection Area.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
In 2006, EPA launched a Site Discovery Initiative ( SDI) in Cabo Rojo to identify possible sources of contamination.  EPA conducted site reconnaissance activities at 68  facilities within the municipality of Cabo Rojo.  In 2007, EPA completed Preliminary Assessment/Site Inspection (PA/SI) reports at 15 properties, 13 of which included the collection of soil and ground water samples.    
 Need for NPL Listing: 
Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.  
