NPL Site Narrative for Caldwell Lace
Leather Co., Inc.
 
CALDWELL LACE LEATHER CO., INC.
Auburn, Kentucky
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Caldwell Lace Leather Co., Inc., Site consists of three
tannery waste areas in Logan County along the south side of Cemetery Road (State Highway 1039)
approximately 2.5 miles northwest of Auburn, Kentucky. The areas have received wastes since 1972. Until
1985, the site was owned by Caldwell and received waste generated by leather-tanning processes at its
plant in Auburn. In November 1985, North Park, Inc., a subsidiary of Auburn Leather Co., purchased the
plant and disposal areas. The plant no longer conducts tanning operations.
 
During 1972-82, wastes, including chrome and vegetable tanning wash sludge, fleshings, screenings,
and leather and gasket scraps, were buried in trenches or placed in unlined lagoons in a 5.5-acre area
of the property. The sludge was generated from a chromium or vegetable tanning solution (water-soluble
extracts from various plant parts) used to stabilize collagen fibers so that they are no longer biodegradable.
Fleshings and screenings resulted from processes in which the leather is prepared for tanning by removing
the hair and tissue from the flesh side of the skin.
 
The second disposal area is a 29.6-acre landfarm. In July 1982, the company received a conditional permit
from the Kentucky Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Cabinet (KNREPC) to mix the sludges
into the soil. The landfarm stopped operating in 1985.
 
In March 1983, KNREPC granted a conditional permit to Caldwell for the third area, a 5.1-acre landfill
adjacent to the old trench/lagoon area, to accept only solid wastes, including the screenings, fleshings,
leather scraps, and gasket scraps. In 1986, North Park, Inc., received a solid waste permit for the landfill
from KNREPC. The company's operations generate only leather trimmings and scrap.
 
In July 1983, KNREPC detected chromium, including the most toxic hexavalent form, in a private well
1,200 feet from the landfill area. The well has been taken out of service. An estimated 660 people obtain
drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site. Subsurface conditions are such that ground
water migrates readily and contaminants can reach surface waters. The closest surface water intake is in
Auburn, approximately 2 miles southeast of the site where Black Lick Creek originates.
 
KNREPC has documented violations of State waste management laws and regulations since 1978. In
September 1984, Caldwell entered into an Agreed Order with the State to remedy past violations and
prevent further violations. The closure consists of a three-phase approach involving application of lime and
fertilizer, regrading and revegetation, and ground water/surface water monitoring.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : All phases of the three-phase closure plan were completed in late 1989. The
landfarming area was never closed.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
