NPL Site Narrative for Callaway & Son
Drum Service
 
CALLAWAY & SON DRUM SERVICE
Lake Alfred, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 4, 2000) : The Callaway & Son Drum Service (CSDS) site
encompasses an approximately 10-acre property located at 890 East Lake Alfred Drive in Lake Alfred,
Polk County, Florida. The site is being placed on the NPL based on evidence that hazardous substances
including, 1,2-dichloroethene, tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), xylene, and vinyl chloride
have contaminated the ground water associated with former CSDS operations beneath the CSDS property.
Ground water in the vicinity of the property is used as a source of potable water by two public water
systems, a mobile home community, and five private residences.
 
CSDS, owned by Mr. Ronald Callaway, was a family business that operated from mid-1977, through
early 1991 as a refurbisher and reseller of used 55-gallon oil and citrus drums. Most of the drum cleaning
operations involved open-top citrus drums. When the citrus industry was at its seasonal peak, the CSDS
facility sandblasted, if needed, and repainted citrus drums at a rate of 500 open-top drums per day. In
addition, the CSDS facility cleaned, sandblasted, and repainted approximately 20 spent oil and solvent
drums per day. In 1983, the owner estimated that over 60,000 drums were located on site.
 
The site includes three major structures, which are now in a dilapidated condition: a former office building,
a drum cleaning structure, and a sandblasting and painting structure. An approximately 45,313 square foot
pond located east of the drum cleaning area received much of the site storm water drainage, and received
drum operations wastewater from overland flow. Operations at the CSDS facility ceased in February 1991
when the facility came to the attention of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP,
formerly Florida Department of Environmental Regulation), after an application was submitted to operate
and construct an industrial wastewater treatment and disposal system for discharge of the rinse tank water
used in its drum cleaning process. In December 1994, CSDS was auctioned and sold to collect back taxes.
 
Analysis of samples collected from drums, surface water runoff, surface impoundment sediments, on-
site soil, and ground water during several sampling events revealed the presence of several hazardous
substances at the CSDS facility. Elevated concentrations of 1,2-dichloroethene, tetrachloroethene (PCE),
trichloroethene (TCE), xylene, and vinyl chloride were detected in ground water wells on the property. All of
these substances can be attributed to drum processing activities that occurred on site.
 
Ground water within 4 miles of the CSDS facility is used as a source of potable water for four municipal
wells, operated by the City of Lake Alfred and the Polk County Utilities Department, one well serving a
mobile home community, and five wells serving individual private residences. The municipal wells are
the main source of water for the City of Alfred and serve approximately 5,985 residents. All of the wells
draw water from various depths within the Floridan ground water aquifer. The Floridan aquifer in the area
of the site is comprised of karst terrain, a geologic material characterized by the presence of sink holes
and underground streams and caverns and in which the flow of ground water is often unpredictable.
Contamination associated with the CSDS facility has not been detected in any of these wells to date.
 
Status (May 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
