NPL Site Narrative for Camilla Wood
Preserving Company
 
CAMILLA WOOD PRESERVING COMPANY
Camilla, Georgia
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (March 1998) : The Camilla Wood Preserving Company (Camilla Wood
Preserving) site is located at 131 East Bennett Street in Camilla, Mitchell County, Georgia. The Camilla
Wood Preserving site encompasses approximately 50 acres. The areas surrounding the site are primarily
commercial properties to the east and south. Residential areas are to the north of the site across East
Bennett Street and west of the site.
 
The facility was constructed in 1947 by the Louis Wood Preserving Company. The Escambia Treating
Company purchased the plant in 1950 and continued wood treatment processes using creosote. The
operating company changed from the Escambia Treating Company to the Camilla Wood Preserving
Company. Camilla Wood Preserving Company filed Chapter 11 bankruptcy on February 8, 1991, and on
February 26, 1991, wood treating operations ceased. Historically, the site has been used to treat wooden
pole products, railroad ties, and other timber with creosote and pentachlorophenol.
 
In 1987 and 1988, EPA collected ground water and soil samples at the Camilla Wood Preserving
site. Elevated concentrations of polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) were detected in soil (surface
impoundments and waste piles) and in on-site ground water monitoring wells. In 1991, EPA performed a
Removal Preliminary Assessment at the Camilla Wood Preserving site. Elevated concentrations of PAHs
were detected in soils and sediments. In February 1994, EPA conducted an Expanded Site Inspection
(ESI) at the Camilla Wood Preserving site to determine if known contamination had migrated to nearby
residences. Analytical results from the ESI indicated the presence of dioxin compounds in the surface
soils of residences across Bennett Street. In October 1994, EPA's Emergency Removal and Response
Branch conducted dioxin confirmation sampling in the yards of nearby residences. During 1994, EPA also
conducted removal activities to stabilize and remove contaminated soil at the Camilla Wood Preserving site
and from residential properties located accross from East Bennett Street.
 
An area of observed soil contamination (approximately 179,000 square feet) extends from the northern
and eastern boundaries on the Camilla Wood Preserving property to the residential area north of the
property. Elevated concentrations of anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene, naphthalene, pentachlorophenol,
pyrene, and dioxins were detected in surface soils in the residential area and can be attributed to the
surface impoundment at the Camilla Wood Preserving site. One worker is employed within the area
of observed soil contamination. Approximately 2,115 people are estimated to live within 1 mile of the
Camilla Wood Preserving site. There are no known terrestrial sensitive environments on areas of observed
contamination.
 
Status (July 1998) : The Remedial Investigation began during the third quarter of FY98.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
