NPL Site Narrative for Camp Lejeune
Military Reservation
 
CAMP LEJEUNE MILITARY RESERVATION
Onslow County, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Camp Lejeune Military Reservation, established in 1941, covers
170 square miles in Onslow County, North Carolina. The complex has a number of facilities, including
Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune and the adjoining Marine Corps Air Station New River. The main
function of the complex is training. ABC One Hour Cleaners in nearby Jacksonville is also being proposed
for the NPL at this time.
 
This site was originally proposed as "Camp Lejeune Marine Corps Base."
 
The Navy has identified 76 potential waste disposal areas in Camp Lejeune and designated 22 as posing
a potential threat to public health and the environment. Currently, the focus is on "Site #21, Lot #140," a
220- by 890-foot area on the Marine Corps Base where pesticides were mixed and application equipment
cleaned. During 1950-51, transformer oil was dumped in an 8-foot-deep pit on the lot. The Navy has
detected pesticides, including DDT, DDE, and aldrin, in soil on Site #21.
 
Ground water at the base is shallow (10 feet) and subsurface formations permeable, conditions that
facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water. An estimated 13,800 people obtain drinking water
from wells within 3 miles of Site #21, the nearest one 1,400 feet away.
 
Camp Lejeune Military Reservation is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established
in 1978. Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up
contamination from hazardous materials. The Navy has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II
(hydrogeologic investigation) is underway.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : The Marine Corps, the State, and EPA are negotiating an Interagency
Agreement under CERCLA Section 120 for oversight of all activities at Camp Lejeune Military Reservation.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
