NPL Site Narrative for Camp Pendleton
Marine Corps Base
 
CAMP PENDLETON MARINE CORPS BASE
San Diego County, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Camp Pendleton Marine Corps Base encompasses
approximately 125,000 acres in San Diego County, California. The installation is bordered by the City of
San Clemente to the north, the City of Oceanside to the south, and the City of Fallbrook to the east. The
base has served as a training base since its establishment in 1941. Industrial and other support operations
have generated hazardous wastes, including waste oils, contaminated fuels and other petroleum products,
cleaning solvents, and pesticide rinsate.
 
Camp Pendleton is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under
this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. As part of IRP studies, the Navy identified a number of potentially contaminated
areas, including eight areas where wastes containing DDT, heptachlor, 2,4-T, lindane, zinc, lead,
trichloroethylene, methyl ethyl ketone, benzene, and xylene had been deposited.
 
Ground water is shallow, averaging 7-14 feet deep, and soils are permeable, conditions that facilitate
movement of contaminants into ground water. The 40,000 people living and working on the base obtain
drinking water from wells within 3 miles of hazardous substances on the base. The nearest well is within
1,320 feet of one of the disposal areas. To date, no contaminants have been detected in the camp's water
supply.
 
San Margarita River, Las Flores Creek, and San Mateo Creek empty into coastal wetlands within 2 miles
of Camp Pendleton. Surface waters within 3 miles downstream are used for recreational activities. Critical
habitats for three birds designated as endangered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service are within 1 mile of
the camp.
 
The Marine Corps has completed a site inspection and is about to start planning for a remedial
investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the base and
identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : The RI/FS is underway.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
