 
OLEM/OSRTI  Washington, DC 20460 
  N ATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)  
***NPL Site*** September 2020 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 CANEY RESIDENTIAL YARDS  Caney, Kansas  
Montgomery County  
 Site Location: The Caney Residential Yards site includes an area consisting of smelter -related cadmium, lead and zinc contamination in surface soils on residential properties throughout the town of Caney, Kansas, in southwest Montgomery County.  Site History: Two former lead and zinc smelters operated in Caney, Kansas, prior to 1931: the Owens Zinc smelter and the American Zi
nc, Lead, and Smelting Company (AZLSC) smelter. Over time, lead particles and other heavy metal particles associated with the smelters’ operations became airborne and settled onto area properties. It is also likely that yards became contaminated as residents transported waste materials from the smelters, in the form of cinders or other material, to homes and other locations for use as driveway paving, construction backfill and landscape material.  Site Contamination/Contaminants: Residential soils are contaminated with cadmium, lead and zinc. The contaminant levels of lead are exceeding health -
  based benchmark levels.  Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  Due to the heavy metal co
ntamination in the surface soils at residences, commercial properties, and rights -of-way in the area, the site poses risks to human health and the environment.  Response Activities (to date): Between 2015 and 2018, the EPA sampled approximately 975 residential properties and cleaned up more than 300 of t
hose properties that were contaminated with lead above the action level.   Need for NPL Listing: The state of Kansas referred the site to the EPA for a time- c
 ritical removal action in March 2015, because it lacked the resources to effectively undertake the cleanup. The EPA projects that approximately 87 residential properties remain to be cleaned up; and approximately 220 commercial or business properties in Caney need to be sampled for cleanup determination. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry ( ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
