NPL Site Narrative for Carolina
Transformer Co.
 
CAROLINA TRANSFORMER CO.
Fayetteville, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : Carolina Transformer Co. occupies approximately 1.5 acres
where North Eastern Boulevard meets Middle Road in Fayetteville, Cumberland County, North Carolina.
The company has recycled electrical transformers at the site since before 1958.
 
After a highly publicized case in North Carolina concerning roadside dumping of PCB oil in July 1978,
residents living near Carolina Transformer became concerned about possible ground water contamination
from spills at the site. Samples taken by EPA in 1978 and 1979 revealed contamination of soil on the site
by PCBs and PCB carrier compounds (chlorobenzenes), contamination by PCB carrier compounds of a
shallow residential drinking water well about 250 feet west of the site, and trace contamination of Carolina
Transformer's deep industrial well. The house with the contaminated well was connected to the Fayetteville
water system in late 1979. The State attempted to have Carolina Transformer correct the contaminated soil
problem but without success.
 
In March 1982, sampling by the State determined that run-off from the site violated surface-water quality
standards for PCBs. In 1984, EPA made efforts to have Carolina Transformer clean up the site. When
the efforts failed, EPA issued a CERCLA Section 106 Administrative Order requiring the company to
remove and properly dispose of the contaminated soil. After the company refused, EPA, using CERCLA
emergency funds, began to clean up at the site in August 1984. During the removal action, EPA excavated
975 tons of contaminated soil and transported it to an EPA-regulated waste landfill.
 
The surficial sand and cretaceous clay aquifers beneath the site are the source of water for private wells
within 3 miles of the site that serve over 3,000 persons.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The Department of Justice has filed an action against the owner/operator of the
site, requesting actual damages (costs of EPA's removal action at the site) and treble damages for failure
to respond to the Administrative Order requiring a removal action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
