NPL Site Narrative for Carroll & Dubies
Sewage Disposal, Inc.
 
CARROLL & DUBIES SEWAGE DISPOSAL, INC.
Port Jervis, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Carroll & Dubies Sewage Disposal, Inc., has operated on a 2.5-
acre site on Canal Street in Port Jervis, Orange County, New York, since the 1960s. The site is at the foot
of a sandstone and shale cliff and upgradient of an extensive gravel mining operation. The city's municipal
landfill is to the south.
 
The company operated a junkyard and disposal facility that in the past accepted industrial waste. Until
1979, waste from two nearby cosmetic manufacturers, Kolmar Laboratories and Wickhen Laboratories,
and Reynolds Metals Co. was deposited into two unlined lagoons. The waste contained benzene, vinyl
chloride, dichlorobenzene, and chromium, according to 1983 and 1985 reports of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC). The company also accepted septic tank waste. In
the summer of 1986, an inspection by NYSDEC found two open lagoons in use and two others that had
been covered with soil.
 
EPA tests conducted in October 1986 found benzene, chromium, lead, and arsenic in on-site soils, which
are permeable. Ground water is shallow (30 feet in some cases). These conditions facilitate movement of
contaminants into ground water. An estimated 1,400 people obtain drinking water from private wells within
3 miles of the site, the nearest within 1,700 feet. A fresh water wetland is within 1,000 feet of the site.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : NYSDEC has closed the site because it does not have an operating permit.
 
EPA has prepared a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. EPA is investigating the
possibility that those potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site will conduct the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
