NPL Site Narrative for Carter Industrials,
Inc.
 
CARTER INDUSTRIALS, INC.
Detroit, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Carter Industrials, Inc., operated an industrial scrap metal yard
in Detroit, Wayne County, Michigan, during 1971-86. This 3.6-acre site is at the north end of Humboldt
Road, which ends at the yard. On-site facilities include a furnace for melting aluminum, a furnace for
melting copper, a brick warehouse, and an office building. Numerous unsheltered piles of scrap metal and
equipment are found throughout the yard.
 
On July 3, 1984, a fire broke out on the west side of the property in an area of wooden pallets and
scrap iron mounds. After noting several transformers in the area of the fire, the city asked the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources (MDNR) and the fire marshall's office to investigate potential exposure to
PCBs in the transformer oil. Oil was found near the fire area and near the base of three large transformers.
Other transformers on the west side proved to be empty. Four soil samples were taken from various
locations, including near the office and 150 feet south of the end of Humboldt Road, to measure
background levels. PCBs ranged from 31 to 2,430 parts per million. Except for the areas noted, no
conclusive evidence of oil storage or dumping was discovered on the west side of the property. However,
other areas were not investigated.
 
A follow-up inspection by MDNR in May 1986 indicated serious environmental contamination at and
around the site. Barrels of used PCB oil were stored on-site in and around scrap metal piles. Oil leaking
from the barrels contained as much as 50 percent PCBs. Additional sampling in June 1986 indicated that
contamination had spread well beyond the Carter Industrials property, including into backyards of nearby
residences. The area is highly urbanized, with 34,000 people living within 1 mile of the site.
 
During June-October 1986, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to carry out removal action at the site.
Soil, air, and the interiors of nearby residences were extensively sampled. Private yards, streets, and alleys
were cleaned with a high-power vacuum. Transformers and drums were removed to a facility regulated
under the Toxic Substances Control Act. Soil and refuse were piled and stored on-site. Alleys and streets
were repaved with 2 feet of asphalt, and the site was fenced.
 
In October 1986, MDNR found PCBs in the sewer leaving the site and at the sewer outfall in the Detroit
River.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA's emergency program continues to maintain the repaved areas around the
site.
 
EPA is conducting a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site.
Notice letters will then be sent to those identified informing them of their potential liability.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
