NPL Site Narrative for Casmalia
Resources
 
CASMALIA RESOURCES
Casmalia, California
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 14, 2001) : The Casmalia Resources site occupies approximately 250
acres in a rural area of the Casmalia Hills in Santa Barbara County, California. It is surrounded by
approximately 4,645 acres of cattle grazing land. The nearest population center is the unincorporated
community of Casmalia, located approximately 1.2 miles south/southeast of the site. From 1973 to
1989, the Casmalia Resources Hazardous Waste Management Facility operated on the site. During its
16 years of operation, this facility accepted more than 4.5 billion pounds of industrial and commercial
wastes. The wastes included pesticides, solvents, acids, metals, caustics, cyanide, and non-liquid
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). The following waste management units were used for the storage,
treatment, and disposal of the wastes: five landfills (PCB Landfill, Pesticide/Solvent Landfill, Metals Landfill,
Caustic/Cyanide Landfill, and Acids Landfill), seven waste burial trenches (Burial Cells Unit), 11 shallow
waste disposal wells, 43 waste storage/evaporation ponds, 15 evaporation pads, seven oil field waste
spreading areas, and three hazardous waste treatment units. Historic site operations have resulted in the
contamination of habitat for a Federal designated threatened species [California red-legged frog (Rana
aurora draytonii)].
 
The owners/operators stopped accepting waste at the facility in 1989, and effectively abandoned efforts
to properly close and clean up the site in the early 1990s. From 1992 to 1996, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) conducted site stabilization activities, as part of an emergency response action.
In 1996, the U.S. EPA negotiated a settlement with a group of major waste generators known as the
Casmalia Steering Committee. The settlement is embodied in a Consent Decree and its Statement of
Work (SOW) that promote a long-term cleanup approach comprised of containing the contaminated land
masses and controlling the movement of contaminated ground water. Objectives of the SOW include
construction of caps and buttresses to stabilize and contain the five inactive landfills, and maintenance
of the following subsurface liquids extraction facilities that are currently on site: the Gallery Well, which
extracts contaminated liquids at the toe of the Pesticide/Landfill; Sump 9B, which extracts contaminated
liquids in the vicinity of a former evaporation pad (Pad 9B); the Perimeter Source Control Trench (PSCT),
which intercepts contaminated liquids from the Burial Cells Unit, former storage evaporation/ponds, and the
landfills; and the Plume Capture Collection Trenches (PCT-A, PCT-B, and PCT-C), which capture ground
water migrating from the southern boundary of the site.
 
In addition to the inactive waste management units and active subsurface liquids extraction facilities, there
are five ponds on site [i.e., Pond A-5, Pond 18, Pond 13, A-Series Pond, and Runoff Control Facility (RCF)
Pond] used for stormwater runoff control and the disposal of liquids from the extraction facilities. From
1995 to 1998, treated effluent from the Gallery Well and Sump 9B were disposed of in Pond A-5. Although
the liquids were treated before discharge into the pond, the treatment standards (i.e., Land Disposal
Restriction standards for F039 hazardous wastes) allowed for the presence of volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) in the effluent. Analytical results of semi-annual monitoring events, which have been conducted
since 1997, indicate the presence of VOCs in Pond A-5 at concentrations significantly above background
levels. Results of field surveys, which were conducted by a consultant to the Casmalia Steering Committee
in April 1999, documented the presence of between seven and 11 adult and subadult California red-legged
frogs along the shoreline of the pond.
 
Status (September 2001) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
