NPL Site Narrative for Castle Air Force
Base (6 Areas)
 
CASTLE AIR FORCE BASE (6 AREAS)
Merced, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Castle Air Force Base is in Merced, Merced County,
California. The base consists of 2,777 acres of runways and airfield operations, industrial areas, and
housing for base personnel. In the past, spent solvents (trichloroethylene and trichloroethane), cyanide,
cadmium, fuels, and waste oils have been disposed of into on-site chemical disposal pits and landfills.
 
The drinking water supply for the base is drawn from an aquifer underlying the base at a depth of
approximately 300 feet. This has been contaminated by trichloroethylene. The Air Force has installed a
new drinking water well for the base that will draw from a deeper, uncontaminated aquifer. The well is
scheduled to be operational in the fall of 1984.
 
Castle Air Force Base is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978.
Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. The Air Force completed Phase I (records search) in October 1983. Phase II
(preliminary survey) is scheduled to begin in late 1984.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Castle Air Force Base has completed installation and hookup of a new drinking
water supply well for the base. IRP Phase II is underway to determine which areas on the installation need
further action.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
