NPL Site Narrative for Cecil Field Naval Air
Station
 
CECIL FIELD NAVAL AIR STATION
Jacksonville, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Cecil Field Naval Air Station covers 20,099 acres in rural
southwest Jacksonville, Duval County, Florida. Established in 1941, the facility is now composed of Cecil
Field Proper (9,516 acres), Yellow Water Weapons Area (8,091 acres), and the Outlying Landing Field
(2,492 acres). Cecil Field's mission is to provide facilities, services, and material support for the operation
and maintenance of naval weapons and aircraft for the Sea Based Antisubmarine Warfare Wings, Atlantic.
Tasks performed at this facility include operation of fuel depots, maintenance and repair of aircraft and
engines, and special weapons support.
 
Cecil Field is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. As part of IRP, the Navy in July 1985 identified 18 disposal areas located throughout
the base, including landfills, lagoons, waste piles, burn areas, and spill areas. The majority of them
received spent solvents, paint wastes, and wastes containing chromium and lead. Both soil and water in
the surface and subsurface were potentially contaminated. The Navy then set up a program of soil and
water sampling for 10 of the disposal areas. During this program, a 19th disposal area was discovered.
 
Three aquifers underlie Cecil Field: the surficial, which is used primarily for irrigation and fire fighting; the
intermediate or "shallow rock," which supplies water to an estimated 2,200 people via private wells within
3 miles of the disposal areas; and the Floridan, which is the major water source for Cecil Field. The private
wells are threatened because no continuous clay layer has been found above the shallow rock aquifer.
 
The major bodies of surface water on Cecil Field are Yellow Water Creek and its tributaries, Caldwell
Branch, Sal Taylor Creek, and Rowell Creek, which is dammed to form Lake Fretwell. Fresh water
wetlands are within 450 feet of one of the disposal areas.
 
The Navy plans to conduct further site investigations of releases and contaminant migration under a permit
issued under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) incorporating corrective
action.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : EPA is reviewing a Navy workplan to fulfill requirements for a remedial
investigation under CERCLA and a facility investigation under RCRA.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
