       
   
   
  
     
        
  
  
        
   
                 
   
    
     
   
   
               
   
          
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2012 
CEDAR CHEMICAL CORPO RATION West Helena, Arkansas 
Phillips County 
Site Location: 
The Cedar Chemical site is an abandoned chemical manufacturing facility located in Phillips County, Arkansas south of West Helena, Arkansas. The site consists of 48 acres along State Highway 242, 1 mile southwest of the intersection of U.S. Highway 49 and Highway 242. The site is in the Helena -West Helena Industrial Park and consists of six former production units, support facilities and an office on the north side of Industrial Park Road. A biological treatment system is located south of Industrial Park Road, Arkansas Highway 242 to the northwest, a Union Pacific railway to the northeast, and other industrial park properties to the southeast and southwest bound the site. 
Site History: 
The facility was initially operated by Helena Chemical in 1970. The facility was purchased by Eagle River Chemical and operated for approximately 18 months. From 1971 to 2002 the facility manufactured or proc essed a variety of agricultural and organic chemicals under various owners and operators. The last owner of record was Cedar Chemical Corporation. On March 8, 2002, Cedar Chemical Corporation filed for bankruptcy. Manufacturing and plant operations were shut down shortly thereafter. The Arkansas Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) assumed control of the facility on October 12, 2002, and currently acts as the caretaker of the facility. 
Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
During its operational life, Cedar Chemical manufactured various agricultural chemicals, including insecticides, herbicides, polymers and organic intermediates. Chemicals of concern are dieldrin, 1,2- dichoroethane, aldrin, dinoseb, chloroform, methylene chloride, toxaphene, methoxychlor, heptachlor and pentachlorophenol. Chemical processing at the production units included alkylation, amidation, carbamoylation, chlorination, distillation, esterification, acid and base hydrolysis and polymerization. 
Potential Impacts on Surrounding C ommunity/Environment: 
Environmental issues associated with the facility include abandoned chemicals, buried drums, ground water contamination, surface and subsurface soil contamination and an abandoned storm water treatment system. 
Response Activities (to date): 
In January 2003, the EPA Region 6 conducted a Superfund removal action and removed chemicals left in tanks and containers. On March 22, 2007, ADEQ, pursuant to the authority of the Arkansas Remedial Action Trust Fund Act (RATFA), issued a Consent Administrative Order (CAO) LIS 07 -027 to Tyco Safety Products-Ansul Incorporated, formerly known as Wormald US, Inc. (Ansul), Helena Chemical Company (Helena Chemical), and ExxonMobil Chemical Co., a division of ExxonMobil Corporation (ExxonMobil) regardi ng Cedar Chemical. The CAO directed that environmental concerns be addressed at the facility. Currently, the facility is leased to Quapaw Products LLC which is revitalizing two of the chemical production units.   
Need for NPL Listing: 
The Governor of Arkansas has requested Cedar Chemical Corporation be placed on the NPL using Arkansas's one state NPL site selection under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA). This nomination has the support of the ADEQ, local citizens, stakeholders and elected officials. There is no other viable cleanup alternative. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxF AQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
