NPL Site Narrative for Cedartown
Industries, Inc.
 
CEDARTOWN INDUSTRIES, INC.
Cedartown, Georgia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Cedartown Industries, Inc., Site covers 6.8 acres in the
southwest section of the City of Cedartown, Polk County, Georgia, in the floodplain of Cedar Creek.
Originally, the site was the location of a foundry and machine shop. From August 1978 to May 1980,
Cedartown Industries operated a secondary lead smelter on the site. The lead came from the cutting of
automobile batteries on the southeast corner of the site. In 1980, the company sold the property to H & M
Transfer Co., which parks and repairs its vehicles on a portion of the site.
 
Remaining on-site when Cedartown Industries ceased operations were an uncovered pile containing
about 5,000 cubic yards of slag and flue dust from the smelting operations and a 32,000-gallon surface
impoundment holding liquids from the battery-cutting operations. This information was contained in Part
A of an application for a permit under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
filed in November 1980 by Sanders Lead Co., owner of Cedartown Industries, Inc. The application was
filed protectively in anticipation of a resumption of operations, which never occurred. The application was
withdrawn in June 1983.
 
In January 1986, the Georgia Environmental Protection Division detected lead in the soil around the pile
and in sediments in the impoundments.
 
The Newala Limestone Formation underlies the site. It feeds a large spring that is the sole source of water
for Cedartown's water system. This spring and a well that supplies the Polk County water system, both
within 3 miles of the site, provide drinking water to an estimated 25,700 people.
 
The site is adjacent to Cedar Creek, which is used for fishing downstream. This area of Cedar Creek is in
the 10-year floodplain. In 1979, the site experienced a 500-year flood.
 
The facility is being proposed for the NPL because it is classified as a protective filer under RCRA Subtitle
C and so is not subject to Subtitle C corrective action authorities.
 
Status (December 1988) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : On December 1, 1989, EPA sent CERCLA "special notice letters" to parties
potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site offering them the opportunity to participate in
conducting the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
