NPL Site Narrative for Cedartown
Municipal Landfill
 
CEDARTOWN MUNICIPAL LANDFILL
Cedartown, Georgia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Cedartown Municipal Landfill covers approximately 130
acres in Polk County just outside Cedartown, Georgia. The area is an abandoned iron ore mine used
as a municipal landfill by the city from the early 1970s to late 1980. The city owns the land and had a
permit from the Georgia Environmental Protection Division to operate it as a sanitary landfill. Bulk waste,
including sludge, and drummed waste were accepted from Diamond Shamrock Corp.'s nearby plant,
according to a 1978 survey of waste disposal sites by the U.S. Congress (the "Ekhardt Report") and
subsequent information the company provided to EPA. Some of the waste contained zinc, cadmium,
copper, chromium, and unspecified organic chemicals.
 
According to the city, the landfill was covered with soil after it was closed. The city periodically stockpiles
construction rubble and soil on the site and uses it for fill material for other areas. Parts of the site are
covered with vegetation. Erosion was observed in unvegetated areas during an EPA inspection in
mid-1985.
 
In May 1987, EPA identified benzene, toluene, xylene, ethylbenzene, naphthalene, and 1,2-dichloroethane
in on-site soil and ground water. The Knox and Newala Geologic Formations, both within 3 miles of the
site, provide drinking water to about 25,000 residents of Polk County. Cedartown Spring, 8,500 feet from
the site, serves approximately 8,600 Cedartown residents.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
