NPL Site Narrative for Centralia Municipal
Landfill
 
CENTRALIA MUNICIPAL LANDFILL
Centralia, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Centralia Municipal Landfill is in the southern section of
Centralia, Lewis County, Washington. It is bordered on the east by railroad rights-of-way; on the south
by Salzer Creek, which empties into the Chehalis River; and on the north by a residential area. The site
encompasses 80 acres, of which approximately 50 acres have been used as a landfill since the site
opened in 1958. The city received a permit from Lewis County in 1974 to accept municipal waste.
 
An unknown quantity of hazardous waste containing PCBs and dioxin, as well as other liquid industrial
wastes, has been deposited in the landfill, according to the Washington Department of Ecology (WDOE).
In 1986, EPA observed leachate from the landfill entering floodwaters of Salzer Creek. The leachate
contained cadmium, chromium, iron, manganese, and zinc at levels exceeding Federal primary and
secondary drinking water standards, according to EPA tests.
 
Ground water at the site reaches the surface during the rainy season. The upper and lower aquifers are
hydraulically connected so that water can move between them. Over 12,000 Centralia residents obtain
drinking water from a blended system that draws primarily from surface water but also uses the lower
aquifer within 3 miles of the site on a standby basis. Surface water is used for irrigation.
 
WDOE is working with the city to bring the landfill up to State and Federal standards.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : The landfill is estimated to reach capacity in mid-1991, when it is scheduled to
be closed. The city has prepared a closure plan for the landfill, which includes a surface water drainage
control system, landfill gas control system, leachate collection system, and a cap.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
