NPL Site Narrative for Central Chemical
(Hagerstown)
 
CENTRAL CHEMICAL (HAGERSTOWN)
Hagerstown, Maryland
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 1996) : Central Chemical blended and produced pesticides and fertilizers
at the 19-acre site on North Jonathan Street in Hagerstown, Washington County, Maryland from the 1930s
until 1968. Pesticide operations ceased in 1968 and the company only produced fertilizer from 1968 until
closure in 1984. Currently the site is leased for warehousing, auto rebuilding, and other purposes.
 
The site consists of three sources: an old stone quarry, a sinkhole, and an area of contaminated soil.
Soluble materials such as DDT, chlordane, and other pesticides and wastes that became out-of-date
or were banned by the government were buried in the old stone quarry. Insoluble wastes were buried
in trenches or sinkholes throughout areas east and northeast of the quarry. Following the discovery of
elevated concentrations of pesticides and heavy metals in 1976, the State of Maryland ordered Central
Chemical to investigate and stabilize the site. After complying with these orders by capping the quarry and
sinkhole areas with clay and soil and vegetating these areas, the State issued a Notice of Compliance to
Central Chemical on December 14, 1979.
 
After discovering an on-site dump area during the excavation of a sewer line in 1987, the State began
negotiating a Consent Order with Central Chemical to clean up the site. To date, Central Chemical has not
signed this order.
 
Through the Cooperative Agreement with EPA, the State conducted an expanded site inspection at Central
Chemical in May of 1993. DDT was detected at elevated levels in sediment samples taken from the storm
water runoff system and Antietam Creek. Antietam Creek is used for fishing and recreational purposes.
High levels of DDT and other pesticides were also detected in soil samples on and near the site.
 
Status (September 1997) : EPA has conducted additional sampling at the site. Central Chemical extended
the fence to enclose the contaminated area in response to the discovery of contaminated soil outside the
former fence line.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
