NPL Site Narrative for Central Wood
Preserving Co.
 
CENTRAL WOOD PRESERVING CO.
Slaughter, Louisiana
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (January 1999) : The Central Wood Preserving Co. (CWP) site is located east of
the City of Slaughter in East Feliciana Parish, Louisiana. The facility is situated on approximately 12 acres
of land bisected by Louisiana State Highway (LSH) 959, east of Highway 67. The property is bordered by
woodlands to the north and south, residential property to the west, and a creek and associated wetlands
to the east-southeast. Drainage pathways channeling surface water runoff are evident between the area
of former facility operations and the wetlands to the east-southeast. The property is currently vacant and is
partially fenced. Approximately 140 people live within a mile of the site.
 
A wood treating facility was operated on the CWP property from the early 1950s until 1991. From the
1950s until 1972, the facility was owned by Mr. J.B. Herrod (now deceased) and used creosote as a wood
preservative. In 1972, Mr. John Barnett, Jr. bought the facility and replaced creosote with Wolmanac, a
wood preserving agent comprised of arsenic acid, chromic acid, and copper oxide (CCA). On January 1,
1991, Mr. Barnett declared bankruptcy and ceased operations. In June 1992, the property was bought at a
sheriff's sale by the East Feliciana Parish Police Jury.
 
Three series of sampling events were conducted at the property from July 1993 through June 1995 under
the direction of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region 6. Elevated concentrations of arsenic,
chromium, copper, and polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), all substances associated with former wood
treating operations, were detected in surface soil samples collected on the CWP property and in sediments
in the wetlands to the east-southeast of the property.
 
Based on sampling completed to date, approximately 7.3 acres of soil within the CWP property boundaries
is contaminated. Sampling of wetlands sediments indicates that this contamination has impacted the
wetlands that receive runoff from the site. The creek and wetlands bordering the site flow into Little Sandy
Creek, located approximately 1 1/2 miles south of the site. Little Sandy Creek is used for fishing.
 
Status (May 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
