NPL Site Narrative for Central Landfill
 
CENTRAL LANDFILL
Johnston, Rhode Island
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Central Landfill covers 133 acres in Johnston, Providence
County, Rhode Island. The owner, RI Solid Waste Management Corp., has a State license to operate
the site as a municipal waste landfill. According to records provided by the State, at least 1.5 million
gallons of hazardous wastes were received at the site during 1978 and 1979. Wells adjacent to the site are
contaminated with organic solvents, (including tetrachloroethylene, chloroform, chlorobenzene, benzene,
and toluene) according to analyses conducted by the State. An extimated 1,900 people obtain drinking
water from wells within 3 miles of the site. Over 4,000 people live within 3 miles of the site. Adjacent
wetlands may also be at risk.
 
The owner has entered into a Consent Order with the State to close the areas where hazardous wastes
were disposed of. A citizen's suit has been filed in the U.S. District Court against the owner seeking
injunctive relief and closure of the landfill. EPA has issued an Administrative Order to require the owner to
conduct all appropriate studies to determine the nature and extent of contamination posed by the landfill.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Recent surveys indicate that the solid waste covers 154 acres.
 
The owner has closed the areas where hazardous wastes were disposed of in accordance with the State
Consent Order.
 
In October 1985, the owner submitted a workplan for conducting a remedial investigation at the site as
required by the EPA Administrative Order.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
