NPL Site Narrative for Charles Macon
Lagoon & Drum Storage
 
CHARLES MACON LAGOON & DRUM STORAGE
Cordova, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Charles Macon Lagoon and Drum Storage Site covers
16 acres on State Road 1103 in Richmond County, approximately 1.5 miles southwest of Cordova, North
Carolina. The owner operated a waste oil reclamation facility which also accepted other wastes, including
spent solvents, acids, and bases. The facility was leased to another operator in May 1981. Operations
ceased in October 1981 when the owner died.
 
During a site inspection in 1980, the North Carolina Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Branch
(SHWMB) found 11 lagoons containing waste oil and sludge and 2,173 55-gallon drums containing various
chemical wastes. Eight of the lagoons were unlined and overflowing. The State's analyses of the oil and
sludge wastes in the lagoons found lead, chromium, and barium at concentrations considered hazardous
under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The drums contained hazardous substances, which
included acetone, methanol, toluene, vinyl thinners, epoxy, enamels, lacquers, ethyl acetate, methylene
chloride, and sodium hydroxide.
 
In November 1982, the owner's estate started to clean up the site under a State court order obtained by
SHWMB in August 1982. After removal of 300 55-gallon drums and installation of two on-site monitoring
wells, the estate's resources were expended. In November 1983, using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA
began to remove all remaining drums and excavated and filled in all but one of the lagoons. The one
unexcavated lagoon contains solidified creosote waste, solidified sludge, 43 crushed empty drums, and
contaminated soil from the cleanup operation. This lagoon was then filled in and capped with 3 feet of clay.
 
During February and March 1985, EPA detected barium, chromium, trichloroethylene, 1,1-dichloroethane,
and 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane in monitoring wells downgradient of the site. An estimated 1,100 people
draw drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site, the nearest at 440 feet.
 
The property slopes gently southwest toward the Pee Dee River, located approximately 1 mile west of the
site. Between the site and the Pee Dee River are two ponds, two streams, and a swamp. In 1985, EPA
detected toluene, which was identified in the wastes during cleanup activities, in the sediments of the pond
closest to the site. Sediment samples from the other locations did not contain toluene above the minimum
detection limits.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, has filed an action against several
generators of hazardous substances sent to the site, the facility operator, and the property owner to
recover the costs of EPA's removal action at the site and all future costs. The enforcement action is
scheduled to go to trial in early 1988.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
