NPL Site Narrative for Charles-George
Reclamation Trust Landfill
 
CHARLES-GEORGE RECLAMATION TRUST LANDFILL
Tyngsborough, Massachusetts
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Charles George Reclamation Trust Landfill (the Trust)
occupies about 70 acres in Tyngsborough, Worcester County, Massachusetts. From 1973 to 1975,
the privately-owned landfill disposed of municipal and industrial waste under permit from the State.
Concentrated leachate has seeped from the landfill through the unconsolidated aquifer and into surface
water in a number of locations. It contains from 70 to 10,000 parts per billion of various chemicals,
including vinyl chloride, benzene, tetrachloroethylene, methyl ethyl ketone, and arsenic. Contaminated
surface water crosses residential and recreational areas at several points. Bedrock wells serving the
Cannongate Condominium contain the same chemicals as does the leachate. In July 1982, the State shut
down the wells.
 
Status (July 1983) : In May 1983, four private bedrock wells serving homes adjacent to the condominiums
were found to have low levels of the same pollutants as the condominium wells. All the other homes in the
vicinity of the condominiums may also be threatened.
 
EPA recently prepared a Remedial Action Master Plan outlining the investigations needed to determine
the full extent of cleanup required at the site. The plan recommended as an interim remedial measure to
provide a permanent water supply for people affected.
 
In the spring of 1983, the Trust sold the trucking company's assets and applied for reorganization under
Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Act. In May 1983, EPA issued a Notice Letter to the Trust requesting its
cooperation in the cleanup.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
