 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxF AQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2012 
       CHEMFAX, INC.     Gulfport, Mississippi  
 Harrison County  
 
 Site Location: 
Chemfax, Inc. occupies 11 acres in Gulfport, MS. The site is bordered by Three Rivers Road to the east, Creosote Road to the south, and County Barn Road and Bernard Bayou to the north. The site is situated on state-owned land.    
 Site History: 
Chemfax, Inc. operated from 1955 to 1995 and produced synthetic hydrocarbon resins and waxes from petroleum products. The primary operation was a paraffin blending process in which different grades of paraffin wax were heated, blended and then cooled with water. The company is now bankrupt.  Several investigations conducted while the site was active revealed contamination of air, soils, ground water, surface water and sediment. Due to this contamination, the site was proposed to the National Priorities List (NPL) in June 1993, but was not added to the NPL at that time. Since that time, the EPA has conducted clean up and investigation work at the site in coordination with the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality.   
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The primary contaminants at the site are benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).  
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
After business operations ceased, a site visit made by EPA in 1998 revealed that the site was easily accessible, many drums were stored onsite and buildings were being lived in by transients. The site  is vacant and inactive, and there is current evidence of trespassing onsite. Bernard Bayou sediments were sampled in 2005 after Hurricane Katrina, with no site-related impacts observed.  
 Response Activities (to date): 
A cleanup action was conducted in 1999 under the EPA’s Superfund removal authority. As part of this cleanup work, asbestos, drums, storage tanks and approximately 2,000 cubic yards of excavated soils were disposed offsite. In addition, most of the processing lines, tank farms, bulk storage areas, buildings and structures were dismantled.   In a 2002 Record of Decision, the EPA selected remedies for soils and ground water. The remedies were not implemented and the EPA is now proposing to amend the remedies. The proposed amended remedy for soils, based primarily on protection of ground water, includes removing an estimated 17,816 cubic yards of soil from the south central process area tank farm, central holding pond, drum burial area, central tank f arm area, abandoned sewer line and southern tank farm areas. The EPA is coordinating with the state to amend the ground water remedy from active treatment to monitored natural attenuation.  
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The site is being added to the NPL in order to receive the funding necessary for cleanup. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
