NPL Site Narrative for Chemical
Insecticide Corp.
 
CHEMICAL INSECTICIDE CORP.
Edison Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 26, 1989) : Chemical Insecticide Corp. (CIC) formerly manufactured,
formulated, and packaged pesticide products on a 5.8-acre property directly south of Interstate Route 287
at 30 Whitman Avenue, Edison Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey. Operations were conducted
from 1958 to 1970, at which time the company declared bankruptcy and operations ceased. The property
is currently vacant and enclosed by a 6-foot chainlink fence. Industrial properties adjoin the property on the
west, south, and east; residential developments are within 1 mile to the northeast and southwest.
 
CIC produced a wide range of insecticides, fungicides, herbicides, and rodenticides. Waste disposal
practices are not clearly documented. However, three surface impoundments were known to have
existed at the site. The hazardous substances found at the site include carbon disulfide, ethylbenzene,
chlorobenzene, beta-benzene hexachloride (beta-BHC), alpha-BHC, delta-BHC (lindane), gamma-BHC,
dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (4,4-DDE), dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (4,4-DDT), and arsenic.
Alpha-BHC, delta-BHC, dieldrin, 4,4-DDE, and 4,4-DDT are present in on-site monitoring wells, according
to tests conducted by EPA in 1987-88. An estimated 35,000 people rely on public wells within 3 miles of
the site as a standby source of drinking water. The closest is approximately 3,200 feet from the site.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the
type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. As an interim
remedy, EPA plans to cap the site to prevent surface water run-off.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
