NPL Site Narrative for Chemform, Inc.
 
CHEMFORM, INC.
Pompano Beach, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Chemform, Inc., formerly conducted contract metal-working
operations on a 4-acre site at 1410 S.W. 8th Street in an industrial area of Pompano Beach in northeastern
Broward County, Florida. During approximately 1962-85, the facility manufactured jet engine parts in a
standard machine shop. Subsequently, operations included manufacturing of a high-tech drilling machine
involving use of acids. In 1977, an inspector from the Broward County Pollution Control Board found
Chemform, Inc., in violation of county regulations for discharge of industrial wastes (oily liquid and sludge)
onto the ground.
 
Chemform, Inc., is adjacent to Wilson Concepts of Florida, Inc., which is also being proposed for the NPL
at this time.
 
In August 1985, EPA collected samples of ground water, surface soils, and subsurface soils. High
concentrations of cyanide, mercury, chromium, and nickel were found in soil and high concentrations of
chromium and nickel in ground water. In July 1986, EPA found chromium, copper, and nickel in ground
water and chromium, copper, nickel, and lead in on-site surface soil.
 
The Biscayne Aquifer, the primary aquifer underlying the site, supplies all municipal water in Broward
County. Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, EPA has designated the Biscayne Aquifer as a sole source of
drinking water in Broward and other counties in south Florida. At the site, a layer of quartz sand overlies
the limestone of the aquifer; numerous cavities in the limestone result in high horizontal and vertical
permeabilities, which facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water as well as movement of
contaminated ground water. At least four municipal well fields are located at least partially within 3 miles
of the site: the City of Pompano Beach's Palm-Aire and Eastern Pompano Beach Well Fields, serving
approximately 80,000 people; and the Broward County District 1B and District 1C Well Fields (used only
during dry periods of the year), serving approximately 13,000 people.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA is investigating the possibility that several potentially responsible parties
will conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at
the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
