NPL Site Narrative for Chemtronics, Inc.
 
CHEMTRONICS, INC.
Swannanoa, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The Chemtronics, Inc., Site covers 10 acres in Swannanoa,
North Carolina, in the Picrate Branch drainage basin. Two areas are involved. Number 1 consists of eight
abandoned acid and organic waste pits used by Chemtronics and its predecessors. Number 2 consists of
two lined basins for neutralization and equalization of wastes prior to their discharge into the Metropolitan
Sewage District collection facilities.
 
The pits were closed in December 1979. Five were covered, and three holding liquids were left uncovered.
All lie in the drainage basin of Gregg Branch. Two wells monitoring ground water near the pits were
contaminated by numerous organic compounds and metals. One well monitoring leachate contained
numerous organics, metals, and high dissolved solids. The leachate was also highly acidic. A monitoring
well about 100 feet northeast of the site showed a dramatic increase in dissolved solids between April
1981 and March 1982. Lead, barium, cadmium, nitrates, and nitrites were found in excessive quantities, in
addition to many identified and unidentified organic compounds.
 
A basin liner in the second area failed in June 1979, discharging waste into ground water and possibly
surface water. In 1980, the liner was replaced. During an inspection of the site, an organic odor was noted
in holes drilled to determine the depth to the water table and the nature of the underlying material.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
