NPL Site Narrative for Chemet Co.
 
CHEMET CO.
Moscow, Tennessee
 
 
The Chemet Co. site is located on Highway 57 approximately 1.2 miles east of Moscow, Fayette County,
Tennessee. The 5-acre site operated from 1978 until 1987 as an antimony oxide plant owned by Frank
Caldon.
 
Major features of the facility include three onsite buildings and two small ponds. The Tennessee
Department of Health and Environment (TDHE) visited the site in 1983 and 1989, and found drums
containing antimony slag, two 15-gallon drums of sulfuric acid, and several bags of soda ash. TDHE also
found no barriers to prevent entry on the site, making it easily accessible. A playground at the LaGrange-
Moscow Elementary School bordering the eastern edge of the Chemet property posed an increased risk of
unauthorized entry to the facility. Approximately 77 people reside within 1 mile of Chemet.
 
On March 19, 1990, the TDHE signed an order for cleanup at the site. The order also stated that TDHE
must approve all removal and disposal of hazardous substances from the facility, and an 8-foot fence must
be constructed to secure the facility.
 
In April 1990, a 5.5 feet high fence was constructed. Approximately 300 tons of contaminated soil were
removed from an area north of Building No. 3 in July 1990, and was stored and locked in Building No.
2. A second removal of soil occurred in September 1991. The TDHE conducted oversight of all remedial
activities at the Chemet facility.
 
In 1992, the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation (TDEC), previously TDHE, collected
samples from the onsite areas of observed contamination, ponds, drainage pathways, and the ball field of
the adjacent school. The samples contained metals associated with the antimony oxide process, such as
arsenic, antimony, and lead. As a result, TDEC ordered Chemet to construct a fence around the area of
contamination that extended offsite. In May 1992, Chemet constructed a fence around the area of offsite
contamination, preventing the 600 students and 65 workers at the elementary school from further contact
with the contaminated soil. Because the contaminated soil is still present on the school's property, the
fence is a temporary measure.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
