NPL Site Narrative for Chemical Sales Co.
 
CHEMICAL SALES CO.
Denver, Colorado
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Chemical Sales Co. is a family-owned chemical distribution
business located at 4661 Monaco Street in an industrial area of Denver, Denver County, Colorado. The
company has operated on the 10-acre property since 1977.
 
The chemicals handled include ketones, alcohols, aliphatic compounds, and chlorinated hydrocarbons
such as tetrachloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, and methylene chloride. Some chemicals are
purchased in bulk and stored in tanks from which they are transferred to drums or other containers for sale.
In August 1985, the company reported a spill of chlorinated solvents to the Colorado Department of Health.
Another spill of water and hydrocarbons was reported in April 1986.
 
EPA tests conducted in late 1986 detected trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethane,
methylene chloride, and chloroform in on-site wells and downgradient off-site wells. An estimated 33,000
people obtain drinking water from South Adams County Water and Sanitation District wells within 3 miles of
the site.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In September 1989, EPA and Chemical Sales Co. entered into a CERCLA
Administrative Order on Consent that requires the company to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
In October 1989, EPA completed construction of a plant to treat contaminated ground water going to
Sanitation District wells.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
