NPL Site Narrative for Chem-Solv, Inc.
 
CHEM-SOLV, INC.
Cheswold, Delaware
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : Chem-Solv, Inc., started a small solvent distillation facility in
1982 on 1.5 acres in Cheswold, Kent County, Delaware. The company recycled waste solvents by placing
a drum on an electric coil heater, which distilled the solvents into a second drum. The contents of the
second drum were filtered into a third drum, which was returned to the customer. The residues remaining
after distillation were classified as hazardous waste under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA) and were stored on-site.
 
On September 7, 1984, an explosion and fire destroyed the distillation facility. At the time, witnesses
observed fluids flowing off a concrete pad into the soil. On September 21, 1984 and January 31, 1985, the
Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DDNREC) ordered the company
under State law to cease operations immediately, monitor ground water, and remove all contaminated soil.
The company took no action.
 
DDNREC conducted studies to characterize the upper Columbia Aquifer adjacent to the site. DDNREC
detected high concentrations of organic chemicals, including trichloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, and
1,1-dichloroethane, in on-site soils and ground water on- and off-site. Both upper and lower zones of the
Columbia Aquifer are contaminated. About 5,500 residents are served by private wells within 3 miles of the
site.
 
In September 1985, DDNREC excavated contaminated soil and began using a process that passes air
through the soil to remove volatile organic compounds. The air-stripping process reduced contamination
to levels that permitted returning the soil to the excavated area. In December 1985, DDNREC started to
recover and treat the volatile organics in the upper Columbia Aquifer.
 
DDNREC has filed suit against Chem-Solv to recover the money it has spent. The company has declared
itself financially insolvent.
 
When Chem-Solv started operations, it filed Part A of a RCRA permit application, giving the company
Interim Status under Subtitle C as a storage facility. In August 1985, DDNREC made a final decision to
deny the storage permit.
 
Because Chem-Solv, Inc., has lost Interim Status (and hence authorization to operate) and there are
additional indications that the owner or operator will be unwilling to undertake corrective action, the
company meets a component of EPA's NPL/RCRA policy.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : After this site was proposed, procedural issues arose and new technical
information became available. Hence, EPA is reproposing the site to allow an additional 60-day comment
period.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In September 1988, EPA and 21 parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site signed an Administrative Order on Consent under CERCLA Section 106(a).
The order called for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. A draft RI report was due in July
1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
