NPL Site Narrative for Cheshire Ground
Water Contamination
 
CHESHIRE GROUND WATER CONTAMINATION
Cheshire, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Cheshire Ground Water Contamination Site is on West
Johnson Avenue in Cheshire, New Haven County, Connecticut. The site was originally proposed as
"Cheshire Associates Property." Investigations subsequent to proposal indicate that ground water
contamination in the area cannot be attributed solely to the Cheshire Associates property. The site is now
considered a plume of contaminated ground water from an unknown source.
 
According to the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (CT DEP), Cheshire Associates,
a New York-based partnership, has owned the 15-acre property at 604 West Johnson Avenue since
1966. Over the years, the property has been leased to a variety of tenants, including Valley National
Corp. (1966-79) and Cheshire Molding Co. (1979-80). Both companies manufactured plastic molding;
neither kept records of disposal practices or waste quantities. Airpax Corp. Plant 2, the current lessee, has
occupied the premises since 1983. The company manufactures electrochemical and electronic devices,
disposing of its wastes on-site in accordance with State regulations. Cheshire Associates has never
occupied the premises.
 
In 1980, General Electric Co., a prospective buyer of the Cheshire Associates property, determined that
soil and ground water were contaminated by hydrocarbons, that ground water was unsuitable for drinking,
and that drinking water supplies near the site were endangered.
 
In 1983, CT DEP signed a Consent Agreement with Cheshire Associates requiring the company to remove
contaminated soil on its property and to monitor eight volatile organic compounds in two private wells
semiannually for 5 years. In October 1983, Cheshire removed 20 cubic yards of contaminated soil to an
EPA-regulated landfill. Recent semiannual sampling indicates low concentrations of 1,1,1-trichloroethylene,
1,1-dichloroethylene, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, benzene, zylenes, and tetrachloroethylene in the private
wells.
 
In June 1985, EPA found low concentrations of 1,1,1-trichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethylene, and 1,1-
dichloroethane in shallow wells on the Cheshire Associates Property and in a bedrock well at 657 West
Johnson Avenue, which has been taken out of service. Approximately 160 people within 1 mile of the site
use private wells. Cheshire municipal wells serving 22,900 people are 2.1 miles southeast of the site.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA is planning to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
