NPL Site Narrative for Chevron Chemical
Co. (Ortho Division)
 
CHEVRON CHEMICAL CO. (ORTHO DIVISION)
Orlando, Florida
 
 
The Chevron Chemical Co. Inc. (Ortho Division) site is located in Orlando, Orange County, Florida. The
site covers approximately 4.39 acres in an industrial area at 3100 Orange Blossom Trail. As a result of an
EPA removal action, all concrete, buildings, and the water tower have been removed.
 
The Chevron Chemical Co. operated a chemical blending facility for pesticides and other crop sprays
between 1950 and 1976. The facility formulated a variety of liquid and powdered pesticides, citric sprays,
and nutritional sprays. Chemicals used in pesticide formulation included xylene, kerosene, mineral oil, and
aromatic naphtha. A few of the pesticides formulated in large volumes consisted of chlordane, lindane,
dieldrin, and aldrin.
 
Prior to 1970, two unlined rinsate ponds onsite were used for the collection and disposal of pesticide
formulating rinse water, barrel rinse water, and storm water. After 1970, the pesticide formulating rinsate
was collected and disposed of offsite at an unknown location.
 
Chevron Chemical ceased operations in 1976. The remaining inventories were removed from the site and
the rinsate ponds were backfilled with soil prior to the sale of the property in 1978 to Robert R. Uttal. Mr.
Uttal removed the pesticide formulating equipment and remaining drums, and washed the building interior
with rinse water. The rinse water was not collected.
 
Mr. Uttal owned and operated the Central Florida Mack Trucks Service Center at the site from 1978 to
1986. Operations consisted of overhauling truck engines, starters, generators and front/rear ends. In March
1984, a tanker truck filled with 3 percent hydrochloric acid and an unknown amount of nitric acid apparently
leaked in the vicinity of the former western rinsate pond, resulting in an explosion. Facility management
excavated the contaminated soil and disposed of it in a secured landfill. The excavation was backfilled with
clean fill.
 
In May 1989, the EPA conducted a Screening Site Inspection at the site. Soil samples indicated the
presence of pesticides, benzene, toluene, xylene, chlordane, naphthalene, and metals. Ground water
samples contained metals, benzene, toluene, xylene, pesticides, trichlorethylene, and chlorobenzene.
 
In September 1990, Chevron Chemical conducted a Contamination Assessment. Soil samples contained
chlordane, xylene, dieldrin, aldrin, endrin, heptachlor, ethion, and arsenic. Ground water samples indicated
the presence of benzene, toluene, xylene, chlorobenzene, aldrin, dieldrin, and heptachlor.
 
On May 15, 1990, EPA, Chevron Chemical Co., and Mr. Uttal signed an Administrative Order on Consent
for the performance of a removal action at the site. Chevron Chemical submitted a Removal Action Plan
that incorporated soil removal, site dewatering, water treatment, and disposal of treated water to an
infiltration gallery onsite. The plan was approved by EPA: Chevron Chemical has completed the removal
action. The order did not address ground water contamination.
 
On January 25, 1993, EPA and Chevron entered into an Administrative Order on Consent for Chevron
to conduct and implement a remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) at the site. The RI/FS is
currently in progress.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
