       
   
    
  
     
          
   
   
            
                    
      
               
           
            
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2012 
CIRCLE COURT GROUND WATER Willow Park, Texas 
PLUME Parker County 
Site Location: The Circle Court Ground Water site is a trichloroethene (TCE) ground water plume in the Trinity Aquifer, parts of which are located within the city of Willow Park and the city of Hudson Oaks in Parker County, Texas. The source of the plume has not been determined. The site plume currently extends approximately one- half mile along Russell Road. Site History: The site was identified by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) in 2006 during routine sampling of a Public Water System (PWS) well tha t is owned and operated by the city of Willow Park PWS. Concentrations of ground water samples collected from the well found TCE to be a bove the Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level (MCL). The well was temporarily shut down. The c ity of Willow Park PWS installed a granular activated carbon filter to remove TCE from the water pumped from the well. The well was then put back int o service. The TCEQ conducted a Preliminary A ssessment (PA) in 2009 and a Site Inspection (SI) and Expanded Site Inspection (ESI) in 2010 to characterize the plume and to identify possible sources of the TCE contamination.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: When the ESI was conducted in June 2010, no sources of contamination were identified. However, high concentrations of TCE were found in the wells. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: One public water supply and five private wate r wells within a one-mile radius of the site contained TCE at concentrations above health based benchmark levels . The highest concentration of TCE that was detected is more than eight times the MCL. All the wells draw water from the Trinity Aquifer. The drinking water wells in the contaminated aquifer are the only source of water for residents, who have been drinking the water and using it for other purposes. Response Activities (to date): Completed removal actions have helped ensure that residents have safe water to drink. T he city of Willow Park PWS restored the contaminated PWS well by installing and maintaining a granular activated carbon filter for the well. The TCEQ has installed granular activated carbon filters on private wells which exceed the M CL for TCE. Need for NPL Listing: The state of Texas referred the site to the EPA for NPL listing and potential remedial activities. The potable water is in a relatively shallow sole source aquifer (approximately 100 to 250 feet deep). Since the source of TCE has not yet been identified and controlled, the plume may continue to contaminate remaining private and public wells. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for listing the site on the NPL from the state of Texas . 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxF AQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
