NPL Site Narrative for Circuitron Corp.
 
CIRCUITRON CORP.
East Farmingdale, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Circuitron Corp. manufactured circuit boards during 1961-86
on about 1 acre at 82 Milbar Boulevard, East Farmingdale, Suffolk County, New York. The site is in a
densely populated industrial/commercial area of Long Island east of Route 110 and the State University
of New York Farmingdale Campus. The property is owned by 82 Milbar Boulevard Corp. Circuitron was a
subsidiary of FEE Industries, which ADI Electronics, Inc., bought in 1984.
 
The facility discharged thousands of gallons of metal-containing plating wastes to an underground leaching
pool permitted under the State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES), to unauthorized leaching
pools beneath the floor of the plating room, and to a storm drain. After ADI Electronics purchased the
facility, the Suffolk County Department of Health Services (SCDHS) identified the discharge to the SPDES
pool and the storm drain.
 
Since 1984, SCDHS has issued Circuitron numerous notices of violations. On June 12, 1984, Circuitron
agreed to an Order on Consent from SCDHS requiring removal of all hazardous substances from the
site. On March 7, 1985, SCDHS issued a Stipulated Agreement in which Circuitron agreed to install
three monitoring wells, analyze ground water, and clean out one of the unauthorized leaching pools. In
mid-1986, the company vacated the facility without complying with all SCDHS requirements. In addition,
Circuitron received one of the largest fines ever in the State for environmental pollution. The original owner
has been convicted of a felony as a result of illegal waste discharges.
 
Extensive sampling of the site by SCDHS detected heavy metals and chlorinated organic solvents
in the SPDES leaching pool, the unauthorized leaching pools, and the storm drains. Analyses of the
monitoring wells installed as part of the Stipulated Agreement detected 1,1,1-trichloroethane in on-site
wells downgradient of the manufacturing building.
 
In May 1987, EPA found potentially explosive conditions at the site. From 125 to 150 drums, most
unmarked and one bulging, were left haphazardly throughout the building when it was vacated.
Incompatible and reactive wastes were not segregated. Some drums were marked sulfuric acid,
hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, and caustic soda. Other smaller containers were strewn outside. Six
concrete holding tanks containing unknown materials were below the floor and three aboveground storage
tanks were behind the building.
 
The aquifers underlying Long Island have been designated as Sole Source Aquifers under the Safe
Drinking Water Act. At least 15 municipal wells serving over 215,000 people are within 3 miles of the site,
the nearest 1,000 feet in the direction ground water flows. The shallow well has been closed since 1978
due to volatile organic chemical contamination from an unknown source.
 
The building is not fenced or guarded. Employees of other businesses in the area use the site for parking.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is preparing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
