NPL Site Narrative for City of Perryton
Well No. 2
 
CITY OF PERRYTON WELL NO. 2
Perryton, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 29, 1998) : The City of Perryton Well No. 2 site is located within the
City of Perryton, situated in the extreme northernmost part of the Texas panhandle. The site consists of
a contaminated city public supply well and associated ground water plume. Well No. 2 is located within
a 1.7-acre maintenance yard used by the City of Perryton Utility Department. The well is located on the
southeast corner of the property, near the northwest corner of the intersection at North Amherst Street and
Santa Fe Avenue. The geographical coordinates of the site are approximately 36 degrees 24 minutes 05
seconds north latitude and 100 degrees 48 minutes 20 seconds longitude.
 
The Well No. 2 site is a public drinking water supply well contaminated by carbon tetrachloride. The well
has been out of service since June 1989 when the Texas Department of Health originally documented the
contamination.
 
The source of contamination addressed in the Hazard Ranking System Package is a "ground water plume
with no identified source." The source of the carbon tetrachloride contamination is unknown and the area of
contamination remains widely undefined. Previous investigations have suggested potential sources for the
contamination; however, they have identified no single definitive source.
 
Ground water is the major pathway of concern. Chemical analysis of ground water samples collected from
Well No. 2, completed within the Ogallala Aquifer, documented the presence of hazardous substances
meeting the criteria for an observed release. Actual contamination of targets has been documented at
Level I concentrations. The Ogallala Aquifer is the principal source of drinking water within Ochiltree
County.
 
Status (January 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
