NPL Site Narrative for Cleburn Street Well
 
CLEBURN STREET WELL
Grand Island, Nebraska
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 29, 1991) : The Cleburn Street Well is a contaminated municipal water
supply well located at the intersection of Cleburn and North Front Streets in the City of Grand Island, Hall
County, Nebraska. Tests conducted in 1986 by the Nebraska Department of Health (NDOH) detected
tetrachloroethene (PCE) in the well, which has been disconnected from the municipal water supply.
Subsequent tests by NDOH and EPA have repeatedly shown traces of PCE in other Grand Island
municipal wells. The municipal system, which consists of 12 wells within the city limits and 12 wells in the
Platte River Island Well Field southeast of the city, serves 38,500 people. Another 1,100 residents not
served by the system draw water from shallow private wells. Food and forage crops are irrigated by 333
wells within 4 miles of the Cleburn Street Well.
 
A soil-gas investigation conducted in September 1988 by EPA detected PCE in three areas. Four potential
sources may be associated with these areas: Nebraska Solvent Co. and three dry cleaners -- One Hour
Martinizing Dry Cleaner, Ideal Cleaners, and Liberty Cleaners & Shirt Launderers. The four have used or
stored chlorinated solvents in their operations. EPA continues to search for additional sources of the PCE
contamination of the Cleburn Street Well.
 
Status (October 1992) : As part of a Remedial Investigation, EPA installed monitoring wells, sampled
the wells, and collected soil samples in the spring of 1992. The results will be presented in the Remedial
Investigation Report scheduled to be available in late 1992. The report will determine which actions, if any,
are necessary to clean up the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
