OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May  2019  
CLIFF DRIVE GROUNDWATER 
CONTAMINATION Logansport, Indiana  
Cass County  
Site Location:
The Cliff Drive Groundwater Contamination site consists of a comingled plume of chlorinated substances that has contaminated the raw (untreated) ground water in five municipal wells that supply drinking water to the city of Logansport. 
 Site History: 
The contamination was first discovered in 1994 and the PCE contamination i n the municipal wells has remained constant for over 20 years. Despite several investigations in the area by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM), the origin of the contaminants has not yet been determined. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Untreated water in municipal wells has been contaminated with tetrachloroethylene (PCE) at concentrations that do not exceed the Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs). However, the contamination has persisted  over the years at a constant level. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Area residents are hooked up to the municipal water supply distribution systems and use municipal water as their potable supply. The contaminated wells provide water to over 18,400 residents, most living in Logansport, Indiana. The water is blended and disinfected before it is distributed to residents.  
 Response Activities (to date): 
IDEM has identified more than 20 active and former facilities that may have used chlorinated substances and could be contributing to the contamination. There are no EPA or state response actions planned. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Indiana referred the site to the EPA because the site requires further investigation and m ay require long-term cleanup. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices]  For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800 -CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
