NPL Site Narrative for Coakley Landfill
 
COAKLEY LANDFILL
North Hampton, New Hampshire
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Coakley Landfill covers 20 acres in a residential area
in North Hampton, Rockingham County, New Hampshire. The landfill border extends into and along the
towns of Greenland to the northwest and Rye to the northeast.
 
Prior to being permitted by the State as a sanitary landfill on April 21, 1971, the site was a sand and gravel
operation. Under an agreement made in 1972, the owner was to be responsible for compaction and cover
material at the landfill, and the City of Portsmouth was to manage the disposal of incinerator ash from the
Portsmouth Refuse-to-Energy Project at the landfill.
 
The State is presently investigating the landfill as a potential source of ground water and surface water
contamination in the area. The site is located in an area of permeable sands and gravels. Both surface
water and ground water leave the site in more than one direction.
 
The presence of volatile organic solvents has forced closing of 13 private residential wells to the north,
east, and south of the landfill. The Town of North Hampton extended a municipal water line to the
residents. The year-round population supplied by wells within 3 miles of the site is 79,300. The State has
set up an early warning system to detect well contamination in the entire area.
 
In March 1983, the State issued a Consent Order requiring the owner to accept only incinerator ash from
the Refuse-to-Energy Project. In addition, the owner was ordered to conduct a full-scale hydrogeologic
investigation of the landfill area. The State is presently working with the owner and other potentially
responsible parties to develop a workplan for the investigation.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : The State completed work on the hydrogeologic investigation it began in the
fall of 1984. The results of this investigation are being incorporated into the workplan for the remedial
investigation. Efforts to get the owner and other potentially responsible parties to conduct a full-scale
hydrogeologic investigation of the landfill area were not successful. Therefore, in the spring of 1985, the
State applied to EPA for a cooperative agreement to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/
FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and to identify alternatives for remedial
action. EPA awarded the cooperative agreement in August 1985, and negotiations with contractors to
perform the RI/FS are underway.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
