NPL Site Narrative for Coast Wood
Preserving
 
COAST WOOD PRESERVING
Ukiah, California
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : Coast Wood Preserving operates a wood-treating facility on a
7.5-acre site 2 miles south of Ukiah in northern California. Portions of the site are located over two streams
at a point 0.5 mile upstream of where they meet the Russian River. The river supplies municipal, domestic,
and agricultural water. The area is a ground water recharge zone. The ground water supplies domestic,
agricultural, and industrial water.
 
As a result of past handling and storing practices, inorganic chemicals have contaminated soil, ground
water, and surface water. A study conducted by Coast Wood found elevated concentrations of chromium,
arsenic, and copper in ground water. Soil and sediment also contain elevated levels of chromium, arsenic,
and copper.
 
The State has taken several enforcement actions against the company. Most recently, in May 1981, the
State issued a Cease and Desist Order (CDO) requiring the company to establish a time schedule and
interim steps to stop releases of toxic waste to ground water and surface water. In September 1981, the
case was referred to the State Attorney General when the company violated the CDO. In December 1981,
Mendocino County Superior Court issued a Stipulation for Preliminary Injunction against the company.
 
Status (July 1983) : At present, the company is continuing its investigation to determine the full extent of
ground water contamination. Concurrently, the company is pumping out the contaminated plume and is
storing it on-site until a final method of treatment and disposal has been determined.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
