NPL Site Narrative for Coker's Sanitation
Service Landfills
 
COKER'S SANITATION SERVICE LANDFILLS
Kent County, Delaware
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : The Coker's Sanitation Service Landfills cover approximately 30
acres near Cheswold in Kent County, Delaware. The site consists of two landfills located directly across
from each other along Route 152. Both areas were used as dumps for latex rubber sludges generated by
the latex plant in Cheswold now operated by Reichhold Chemicals, Inc. Reichhold acquired the plant in
1976. Prior to that, it was operated by Standard Brands, Inc. (1963 to 1976) and International Latex Corp.
(before 1963).
 
The landfill on the north side of Route 152 consisted of unlined trenches and operated from 1962 until
1976. Coker's Sanitation Service, which handled the disposal operations for Reichhold and Standard
Brands, leased this property from the current owner. The landfill to the south of Route 152 operated from
1977 until 1980 under a State solid waste disposal permit. Wastes were disposed of in lined trenches.
Coker's Sanitation Service also leased this property from the current owner.
 
According to EPA tests, ground water in the vicinity of the landfills has been contaminated by acrolein and
ethylbenzene. To date, residential wells close to the landfills do not contain these contaminants or violate
any drinking water standards, according to EPA. About 4,000 people depend on wells within 3 miles of the
site for drinking water.
 
Bis (2-chloroethyl) ether was also detected in leachate coming from the landfills. Drainage from the site
enters Willis Creek, which feeds Garrisons Lake 6,000 feet downstream. The lake is used for recreational
activities.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA has started a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. EPA is also
negotiating with individuals or companies potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site to
conduct the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
