OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Proposed Site ***  March 2015
COLONIAL CREOSOTE  Bogalusa, Louisiana  
Washington Parish  
 Site Location: 
The Colonial Creosote site is located in the southeast portion of Bogalusa, Washington Parish, Louisiana . The 32-acre property is bound on the west and northwest by a railroad spur for the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad and undeveloped land to the east and south.  
 Site History: 
Colonial Creosote began wood treating at this facility in approximately 1911 and continued until it was closed in 1953. Operations included bark removal, wood preserving and product storage. Creosote was the primary preserv ative used to treat wood at the facility. Colonial was owned by American Creosote of Louisville, Kentucky. In March of 1957, the property was sold to Lakeview Sand and Gravel Co. Inc. which later became Bogalusa Concrete and continued to operate at the site until 2008. The Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality referred the site to the EPA for site evaluation in 2011.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Soil, sediment and ground water are contaminated with creosote and creosote -related compounds. Creosote is used as a fungicide, insecticide, miticide and sporicide to protect wood and is applied by pressure methods to wood products, primarily utility poles and railroad ties.  Soil, sediment and ground water at Colonial Creosote contain poly cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) found in creosote, including acenaphthene, anthracene, benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(b)fluoranthene, chrysene, fluorene, fluoranthene, 2- methylnaphthalene, phenanthrene and pyrene.  
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Hazardous substances including PAHs from former wood treating operations have migrated from the facility to underlying ground water, adjacent wetlands and nearby surface waters. There are fisheries located in downstream waters.  
 Response Activities (to date):  
No response actions have taken place. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Louisiana referred the site to the EPA for NPL evaluation in 2011. Without remediation of the site; releases will continue to contaminate  ground water and downstream surface waters . Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time.  The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.  See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
