NPL Site Narrative for Commodore
Semiconductor Group
 
COMMODORE SEMICONDUCTOR GROUP
Lower Providence Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Commodore Semiconductor Group Site covers about
10 acres in the Valley Forge Corporate Center in Lower Providence Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania. Commodore manufactures computers, calculators, and various electronic components on
property rented from Valley Forge Corporate Center.
 
Waste solvents, including trichloroethylene (TCE), were stored in an underground concrete storage tank
on-site until 1974, when it was taken out of service. A steel tank was then installed. Inspections conducted
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER) indicate both tanks have leaked.
 
According to tests conducted by EPA, PA DER, and Commodore, soils and ground water both on and off
the site have been contaminated with TCE, 1,1-dichloroethylene, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, and 1,1,2,2-
tetrachloroethane. Two public water supply wells of the Audubon Water Co., which serves 6,300 people,
were taken out of service in 1979 due to contamination. Approximately 840,000 people draw drinking water
from wells into the contaminated aquifer within 3 miles of the site.
 
In 1979, Commodore started investigations and cleanup actions at the site. The company has excavated
soils and pumped water from a contaminated well, then sprayed it onto fields. The volatile solvents
dissipate into the air. Since February 1984, an air stripper, which is more efficient at removing the solvents,
has been in use.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : In July 1988, Commodore Business Machines, Inc., parent company of
Commodore Semiconductor Group, and EPA signed an Administrative Order on Consent under CERCLA
Section 104. The order calls for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. Field work is scheduled to begin
shortly.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
