NPL Site Narrative for Computer Circuits
 
COMPUTER CIRCUITS
Hauppauge, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 1998) : Computer Circuits is an inactive facility located on a 1.7-acre lot
in an industrial/commercial area of Hauppauge, Suffolk County, New York. It is bordered by Marcus
Boulevard to the west and other commercial businesses to the north, south, and east. The property is
occupied by a one-story building that is located near the center of the site. Prior to 1969, the property was
vacant. From 1969 to the present, the property has been owned by MCS Realty, who has been leasing the
property to various companies. From 1969 to 1977 Computer Circuits occupied the entire property. Four
companies have occupied the property since Computer Circuits vacated it. These include a trade school
(1977 to 1980), NAV-TEC, an assembler of electronic components (1980 to 1983), and TYMSHARE, a tax
form preparation company (1983 to 1989). The site is currently occupied by Algorex Power and Control
Electronics, Incorporated.
 
Computer Circuits was a manufacturer of printed circuit boards for both military and commercial
applications. Various chemicals were used in the manufacturing process including copper sulfate, nickel,
sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, lead fluoroborate, fluorides, copper, trichloroethylene, photography
chemicals, gold cyanate, ammonia, lead, nitric acid, and tin. Waste liquids from the manufacturing
process were discharged to five cesspools located to the southeast of the building. These cesspools were
subsequently disposal. In 1975 Computer Circuits applied for and was issued State Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES) Permit No. 0075485, Permit Reference No. 47-0384 from the New York State
Department of Environmental Conversation (NYSDEC). This permit, which was effective from April 1975
to April 1977, allowed Computer Circuits to discharge effluent containing copper, iron, nickel, lead, silver,
and phenol to outfall No. 001, which led to the cesspool system. On numerous occasions between 1976
and 1977, the Suffolk County Department of Environmental Control (SCDOEC) collected samples from the
cesspools, and found that copper and lead were consistently detected at levels above the SPDES permit
limits. Computer Circuits has an inspection history detailing poor housekeeping practices, and numerous
inspections conducted by the SCDOEC indicated repeated violations. An inspection conducted in 1976
revealed that the site was littered with trash, broken barrels, and spilled piles of chemicals and blue/green
colored sludges.
 
In 1989 an Order on Consent Investigation Report of Computer Circuits was conducted on behalf of
MCS Realty. During the investigation, three monitoring wells (MW's) were installed at one upgradient
and two downgradient locations. In 1996, an EPA contractor conducted a Hazard Ranking System
sampling investigation of the site. Fourteen subsurface soil samples were collected from the cesspool
areas and background locations on the property. Chemical analysis of the samples indicated the presence
of volatile organic compounds and inorganic constituents at levels significantly above the background
levels established for the site. In addition, three monitoring wells were installed on the site property at
one upgradient and two downgradient locations. Ground water samples were collected from the three
monitoring wells installed (MW 4, MW 5, and MW 6) and two of the existing monitoring wells (MW 2 and
MW 3). It should be noted that there is a discrepancy in the sampling trip report. MW 6 is identified as an
upgradient monitoring well, however, a review of historical information indicated that another cesspool
existed on the site in the area where MW 6 is located, therefore changing its status to a downgradient
monitoring well location. Chemical analysis of the ground water samples indicated the presence of copper
at levels significantly above the background levels established for the site.
 
The Computer Circuits site overlies an interconnected aquifer system consisting of the Upper Glacial
Aquifer and the Magothy Formation. Within four miles of the site all residents obtain their drinking water
from potable wells with 60 municipal wells located within four miles of the site. The site is located over a
New York State designated Wellhead Protection Area.
 
Status (May 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
