 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluate d with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs ca n be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-AT SDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2012 
COMPASS PLAZA WELL T CE  Rogersville, Missouri  
 Greene County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Compass Plaza Well TCE site is located on the western edge of the city of Rogersville, Missouri.  
 Site History: 
The Compass Plaza Well TCE site consists of contaminated  ground water that has contaminated domestic and irrigation wells. The site includes a small cluster of wells in Greene County near Compass Plaza, a commercial area of Rogersville. Following public drinking water monitoring by the Missouri Department of Natural Resources (MDNR), trichloroethene (TCE) was detected in the Compass Plaza strip mall drinking water well and at two nearby public wells.  
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The contaminant of concern is TCE in the soil and ground water.  
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
There are three municipal wells within four miles of the site. Rogersville City Well #2 is only used for monitoring purposes. The Census of Missouri Public Wate r Systems lists the population served by the City of Rogersville’s two public wells as 1,500 people. The two wells used for production (Wells #1 and #4) are located between 1- 2 miles of the site. Additionally, there are 13 community and non- community wells and 557 private wells within four miles of the site.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
Of the 557 private wells within a four mile radius, approximately 235 have been sampled. TCE was detected in the Compass Plaza strip mall drinking water well and in 13  private drinking water wells. Of these 13 private drinking water wells, six have shown TCE levels above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL). The EPA has provided water treatment systems to those residents whose private wells are contaminated with TCE above the MCL. The EPA, in cooperation with MDNR, the Greene County Resource Management and the Natural Resource Conservation Service, capped a well with high concentrations of TCE to protect ground water resources. These same agencie s also oversaw the construction of a new drinking water well .   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of Missouri referred the site to the EPA. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated , but they are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter from the state supporting the listing of the site to the NPL.  
