NPL Site Narrative for Concord Naval
Weapons Station
 
CONCORD NAVAL WEAPONS STATION
Concord, California
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 7, 1992) : Concord Naval Weapons Station is located in the north-
central portion of Contra Costa County, California. Approximately 30 miles northeast of San Francisco,
it is bordered to the north by Suisun Bay and to the south and west by the City of Concord. The facility
encompasses over 12,800 acres in three separate holdings: the Inland Area (6,150 acres), the Tidal
Area (6,650 acres), and a radiography facility in Pittsburg, California. On-site activities also include
administrative and support work. Transshipment operations are centered on the wetlands bordering Suisun
Bay (Tidal Area). Wastes generated on site from base operations have been disposed of in the Tidal Area
since base operations began in 1942.
 
The Navy's substantial investigations of the station have identified 19 sites to be investigated under the
Installation Restoration (IR) program, of which 8 are located in the Tidal Area. In addition, 24 Solid Waste
Management Units (SWMUs) will be investigated, pursuant to RCRA, 4 of which are located in the Tidal
Area.
 
The Tidal Area Landfill, R-Area Disposal Site, and the Wood Hogger Site are wetlands in the western
portion of the Tidal Area contaminated from on-base waste disposal. The 20 acre site was a major disposal
area from 1944 to 1979 and received an estimated 33,000 tons of waste. Materials and waste generated
during the segregation of conventional munitions were discarded in the R-Area Disposal Site. At the Wood
Hogger Site, wood contaminated with pentachlorophenol (PCP) was chipped and placed in an adjacent
wetland. Another potential wetland area of concern is the Froid and Taylor Road site. Chemical analytical
data identified hazardous substances including zinc, copper, cadmium, lead, arsenic, naphthalene, and
methylene chloride, in soil, sediment, or surface water.
 
The Kiln Site and the K-2 Area are wetlands in the eastern portion of the Tidal Area. They were
contaminated as a result of private sector industrial activities, and were subsequently purchased by the
Navy to create a "buffer zone" for base operations. Soil sampling in these areas in 1986 detected zinc,
copper, lead, cadmium, and arsenic. High tides inundated the sources, carrying contaminants to Suisun
Bay. Elevated levels of copper, zinc, lead, and arsenic were detected in surface and composite soil
samples in the K-2 Area.
 
The contaminated areas are critical habitats for the salt marsh harvest mouse, a Federally endangered
species. The black California rail, a candidate Federally endangered species, and the California
clapper rail, a Federally endangered species, inhabit adjacent wetlands. Suisun Bay supports extensive
commercial and recreational fishing and is a habitat for the Winter-run Chinook Salmon, also a Federally
endangered species.
 
Status (December 1994) : Workplans for the Tidal and Inland Areas have been completed and approved.
Field sampling occurred in the Tidal Area in 1994 and is planned for the Inland Area in the spring of 1995.
RCRA solid waste management units will also be sampled in 1995. Those requiring clean up will be folded
into the CERCLA remediation.
 
The Navy conducted a removal of sediments in the Litigation Area in 1994. A post removal ecological
assessment is also planned for 1995.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
