NPL Site Narrative for Conklin Dumps
 
CONKLIN DUMPS
Conklin, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Conklin Dumps Site consists of two abandoned landfills
located on a 619-acre tract of land in Conklin, Broome County, New York. The Town of Conklin owned and
operated the landfills from 1964 to 1975.
 
The lower or easternmost landfill, which operated from 1964 to 1969, consists of three linear trenches.
Assuming an average depth of 30 feet for each trench, the lower landfill contains approximately 3.7
million cubic feet of waste material. Preliminary indications are that the landfill contains municipal solid
waste, according to a consultant to the Broome County Industrial Development Agency (BIDA), which is
considering purchasing the property to create an industrial park. Some industrial and chemical wastes also
may have been deposited.
 
The upper landfill operated from 1969 until it closed in 1975 under a closure order issued by the State.
Most of the waste deposited in this landfill was placed in six unlined cells; subsequently, additional waste
material was piled over the cells. The majority of the waste is municipal solid waste, although sampling
indicates that some industrial and chemical waste may have been deposited. Assuming an average depth
of 25 feet, the total filled volume of this landfill is estimated at 6.9 million cubic feet.
 
The State has observed leachate from the dumps draining toward Carlin Creek, a tributary to the
Susquehanna River, which is used for recreational activities. Ground water on the site is grossly
contaminated with arsenic, chromium, mercury, and various organic chemicals, including benzene,
according to tests conducted by BIDA's consultant. Private wells near the site contain high levels of arsenic
and traces of organic chemicals, according to the consultant and the New York State Department of
Health.
 
The lower dump is in highly permeable soils and is about 800 feet upgradient from residential areas using
private wells. About 2,000 people depend on wells within 3 miles of the site for their drinking water. On
the site is a large wetland designated by the U.S. Department of the Interior as an important biological
resource.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
