NPL Site Narrative for Conrail Rail Yard
(Elkhart)
 
CONRAIL RAIL YARD (ELKHART)
Elkhart, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Consolidated Rail Corp. (Conrail) has operated a rail yard on
County Road 1 at the southwestern edge of Elkhart, Elkhart County, Indiana, since 1976. Previously, the
675-acre property had been a rail yard for New York Central Railroad (1956-68) and Penn Central Railroad
(1968-76).
 
The Indiana Department of Environmental Management has documented numerous spills at the rail yard
since 1976.
 
In June 1986, EPA's emergency removal program was asked by the Elkhart County Health Department
to confirm analyses indicating that local wells were contaminated with carbon tetrachloride and
trichloroethylene (TCE). EPA's investigation identified five areas covering about 5 acres requiring further
study: the diesel shop, the area surrounding oil and water tanks, several areas where wastes may have
been buried, the shop where car tanks were cleaned, and the Crawford Ditch, which flows into the St.
Joseph River. Analyses indicate that soils in some of these areas contain carbon tetrachloride, and wells
downgradient of the rail yard contain carbon tetrachloride, TCE, tetrachloroethylene, chloroform, and
dichloroethane. EPA installed activated carbon units at residences with contaminated wells. EPA analyses
indicate a plume of contaminated ground water that is 1.5-2 miles long and empties into the St. Joseph
River. An estimated 55,000 people obtain drinking water from Elkhart municipal wells and private wells
within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In June 1988, EPA issued a "special notice letter" offering Conrail the
opportunity to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. In September 1988, EPA notified
Conrail its response could not be considered an acceptable "good faith" offer. Accordingly, EPA is
conducting the RI/FS; field work began in August 1989. Initial data confirmed the existence of two plumes
of contaminated ground water. EPA is reviewing the data to assess the need for additional field work and
interim remedial measures.
 
Field investigations by a Conrail contractor found TCE and carbon tetrachloride in soil and ground water
within the rail yard.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
