NPL Site Narrative for Conservation
Chemical Co.
 
CONSERVATION CHEMICAL CO.
Kansas City, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : The Conservation Chemical Co. (CCC) Site covers
approximately 6 acres in Kansas City, Jackson County, Missouri. It is on the south bank of the Missouri
River near where the Blue and Missouri Rivers meet. CCC operated a waste treatment and disposal facility
on the site from about 1960 to 1980. The primary wastes handled were metal-finishing wastes, including
pickle liquors, spent plating solutions, heat-treating materials, and alkaline cyanides; chlorinated and
nonchlorinated solvents and other organics; alkaline refinery wastes; laboratory chemicals; and wastes
containing arsenic and elemental phosphorus. Records indicate that approximately 300,000 tons of wastes
were accepted. Some were incinerated, but most were buried in lagoons which were either unlined or
inadequately lined. CCC attempted physical stabilization of the lagoons by mixing the lagoon contents with
fly ash and waste pickle liquor. The lagoons were then covered with soil.
 
CCC obtained Interim Status for various storage tanks under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA) by filing Part A of a permit application. Subsequently, those wastes were disposed of
off-site, and the tanks are no longer used.
 
EPA has detected various hazardous substances in on- and off-site surface soil and in ground water
downgradient of the site. This ground water is part of an aquifer used locally as a drinking and industrial
water supply. Because the ground water and the Missouri River are hydraulically connected, the
contaminants are entering the river, which is used locally and regionally for recreation, industry, irrigation,
and municipal water supply.
 
On November 22, 1982, the United States filed a civil action under RCRA and CERCLA seeking a court-
ordered site cleanup and reimbursement of the Government's investigative costs. The parties sued
were: CCC, its president, and its principal stockholder; Conservation Chemical Co. of Illinois (a related
corporation); and four major contributors of waste to the site -- Armco, Inc., FMC Corp., IBM Corp., and
AT&T Technologies, Inc. (formerly Western Electric). On June 19, 1984, the four original generator
defendants filed third-party suits against 152 other generators, 7 Federal agencies, and 16 insurance
companies. On October 1, 1984, 77 additional third-party defendants were added to the lawsuit.
 
Status (April 1987) : On August 2, 1985, the Government reached a preliminary settlement under which
the four original generator defendants agreed to undertake remedial design and remedial action at the
CCC site and to reimburse the government $500,000 of its response costs. Additional studies during the
design identified conditions that would make the remedial action more difficult and expensive.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : EPA is proposing to place this previously proposed RCRA site on the NPL. Based
on an evaluation of CCC's record of compliance, EPA has determined that the company has demonstrated
unwillingness to take corrective action.
 
In November 1987, EPA and the defendants agreed to a remedial action involving pumping and treating
ground water. The Consent Decree was signed in April 1988.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has placed this site on the NPL.
 
In the fall of 1988, the defendants submitted the remedial designs associated with the surface cleanup, and
the withdrawal and monitoring well network activities, pursuant to the Consent Decree. The ground water
treatment plant design was submitted on schedule in April 1989.
 
Surface cleanup activities have essentially been completed. Construction has started on the well network
and treatment plant.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
