NPL Site Narrative for Consolidated Iron
and Metal
 
CONSOLIDATED IRON AND METAL
Newburgh, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (December 1, 2000) : The Consolidated Iron and Metal (Consolidated Iron)
site is an inactive car and scrap metal junk yard and dealer located at the foot of Washington Street,
Newburgh, Orange County, New York. The facility operated from approximately 1960 to 1999. The facility
occupies approximately 7 acres of land bordering the Hudson River in a mixed industrial, commercial,
and residential area. The site is bounded by a boat marina to the north, Conrail railroad tracks/South
Water Street to the west, a wastewater treatment plant to the south, and the Hudson River to the east.
The Consolidated Iron facility consists of a pile of tires adjacent to the southern boundary; a staging area
and smelter in the southwest corner of the facility; a compactor and metal shear on the eastern boundary;
and an office, scale and garage located adjacent to the northern boundary. Scrap metal piles are found
throughout the southeast portion of the property. The property is currently owned by the Consolidated Iron
and Metal Company.
 
From World War I until the early 1940s, Eureka Shipyard operated at the facility. Scrap metal recycling and
storage operations have occurred for approximately the past 40 years. According to the current owner, the
smelter operated from 1975 through 1995. The smelter was used primarily to melt aluminum transmissions
to produce a reusable aluminum product. Other metallic materials were also smelted, resulting in a lead-
contaminated ash/slag by-product. Other operations included sorting ferrous and non-ferrous metal scrap
for recycling.
 
From 1997 to 1999, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) conducted
several inspections at the facility. NYSDEC observed oil and other waste liquids on the facility soils in
February 1997. In July 1998, NYSDEC observed storm water being discharged into the Hudson River from
the northeast corner of the property without appropriate testing or permits. A subsequent site inspection
was conducted, and a berm was noted to be located at the water's edge and constructed of untested and
fairly porous waste material from the site. Stained soils were observed near the metal shearing machine
and throughout the facility. NYSDEC notified the facility on August 20, 1998 that an individual State
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit was required. In March 1999, it was noted that the
storm water discharge had a visible oily sheen, as did the Hudson River. Oil sheens were also observed
on puddles throughout the facility. The New York State Attorney General prosecuted Consolidated Iron
for various violations including illegal discharge to surface water without an SPDES permit in the spring of
2000.
 
On August 11, 1998, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) sampled an ash/slag pile that
was generated by the aluminum smelting operation. Analytical results identified the presence of lead at
a maximum concentration of 6,350 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg). Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
were detected at maximum concentrations of 27,000 micrograms per kilogram (µg/kg). Starting on June
28, 1999, the ash/slag pile was processed to segregate the scrap metal into ferrous, non-ferrous, and
fine piles. The resulting fine pile was removed, concurrently with the segregation process, to a Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)-approved treatment, storage and disposal facility (TSDF) for
stabilization and landfilling. The removal of this pile, approximately 6,600 tons, was completed on August
13, 1999.
 
From approximately late July 1998 to September 1998, a soil pile, not related to the former smelting
operation, was generated by the recycling operation. On July 7, 1999, 12 soil samples were collected
from the processed soil pile by EPA. Analytical results indicated that the maximum concentration of lead
in the soil pile was 4,000 mg/kg. PCBs were detected at a maximum concentration of 39,000 µg/kg.
Subsequently, from September 14 to October 4, 1999, EPA removed this processed soil pile from the
facility. The processed soil was taken to a RCRA-approved TSDF for stabilization and landfilling.
 
On August 10, 1999, EPA collected 19 soil samples, including surface and subsurface samples, from the
soils upon which the ash/slag pile was located. The samples were analyzed for lead, and concentrations
ranged from 1,750 to 8,100 mg/kg in the surface soil samples.
 
From September 20 - 23, 1999, EPA conducted an Integrated Assessment (IA) at the site to determine
the horizontal and vertical extent of contamination. Surface and subsurface soil and ground water
samples were collected. Analytical results indicated the presence of volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
semivolatile organic compounds (SVOCs), pesticides, PCBs, and metals at concentrations significantly
greater than background in surface and subsurface soil samples.
 
An observed release to surface water is documented by direct observation through the direct deposition
of hazardous substances along the southeastern corner of the property and by flooding of soils containing
hazardous substances located on the northeast corner of the property. Elevated concentrations
of benzo(a)pyrene, PCBs, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, and zinc are documented to the
Hudson River, which is a fishery and a sensitive environment (i.e., state-designated water body for the
maintenance of aquatic life).
 
Status (June 2001) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
