 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR T oxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2012 
CONTINENTAL CLEANERS   Miami, Florida  
 Miami -Dade County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Continental Cleaners site is located at 798 NW 62nd Street in the City of Miami, Miami-Dade County, Florida, and is on the southeast corner of NW 62
nd Street (Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard) and NW 8th Avenue. The site is in the Liberty City neighborhood and it is surrounded by residential and commercial properties.     
 Site History: 
Laundry and dry cleaning operations were  conducted at the site from approximately 1967 to 2005. The facility is currently used as a pickup and drop off location for offsite dry cleaning. In the 1990s, local environmental officials found dry cleaning chemicals had been released to the ground and ground water. Numerous studies have documented tetrachloroethene (PCE), a common dry cleaning solvent and its breakdown products in the soil and ground water at the site. The facility was determined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) to be ineligible to participate in the state Drycleaner Solvent Program. Subsequently, the site was referred by the FDEP to the EPA for Superfund evaluation.     
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
PCE was found at high concentrations in the floor drain and in ground water at the site. Trichloroethene (TCE) and cis-1,2-dichloroethene (DCE) were also detected at concentrations two and three times the level of PCE in the groundwater. TCE and DCE are breakdown products of PCE. The ground water concentrations of these volatile organic compounds (VOCs) significantly exceed state and federal drinking water standards. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The site is approximately half an acre. Contamination may exist beneath the building and in the back of the facility in soils down to the ground water table. The ground water is contaminated on the site, and  it is likely to have migrated offsite. The aquifer beneath the site is the sole source of municipal drinking water for southeast Florida.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
There have been a number of investigations conducted by the Miami-Dade County Department of Environmental Resources (DERM) and the FDEP. Waste discharge violations and enforcement issues were identified by the DERM. However, no cleanup activities have taken place at the site.     
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of Florida referred the site to the EPA to allow for a comprehensive cleanup to address  all of the human health and environmental risks posed by the s ite. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated , but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.    
