NPL Site Narrative for Cooper Drum
Company
 
COOPER DRUM COMPANY
South Gate, California
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (January 11, 2001) : The Cooper Drum Company site occupies approximately
4 acres in a mixed residential, commercial, and industrial area of the city of South Gate. Drum recycling
has been conducted at the site by a number of different operators since 1941. The Cooper Drum Company
operated the facility from 1971 to 1992. In a 1991 interview, Cooper Drum Company representatives
stated that approximately 70 percent of the drums accepted for recycling were from oil companies, with the
remaining 30 percent including paint, resin, and solvent drums.
 
The recycling operations included reconditioning and, when warranted, heavy duty cleaning (also known
as hard washing). The reconditioning operation was set up as an assembly line process along the length
of an elevated concrete floor in the southern portion of the property. It essentially consisted of flushing
and stripping the drums with sodium hydroxide in preparation for painting and resale. Fluids generated
by the reconditioning operation were conveyed to two holding tanks and five clarifiers that bordered the
north side of the elevated floor. The settled out contents were pumped out and transported off site for
recycling or disposal. The liquid was circulated back into the reconditioning process. Prior to the late
1980s, the holding tanks and clarifiers consisted of open concrete sumps that were connected to each
other and the reconditioning process tanks (e.g., flushers and strippers) by open concrete trenches. Since
then, closed-top steel tanks have been installed over the sumps, with the sumps providing secondary
containment, and the trenches have been replaced with hard piping. Drums that contain solid or highly
viscous residual materials are subjected to hard washing, in addition to reconditioning. Until 1992, the
hard wash operation was conducted in the northern portion of the property and consisted of placing chains
and sodium hydroxide inside the drums, and then rotating the drums over four concrete sumps that were
fitted with grates. The sumps were connected to each other by open concrete trenches. In 1992, the hard
wash operation was moved to the east end of the drum reconditioning facility in the southern portion of the
property. The new hard wash area is hard-piped and equipped with secondary containment. High pressure
spraying has replaced chaining. The sumps in the former hard wash area are no longer in use.
 
At least eight soil sampling events have been conducted at the site since 1987. In April 1987, the Los
Angeles County Department of Health Services was notified by Tweedy Elementary School staff that an
odorous seep had been noted in an area of exposed soil on the school's property, adjacent to the south
wall of the Cooper Drum Company's reconditioning facility. Exploratory trenching indicated that the liquid
was emanating from cracks and hollow pipe openings in the concrete floor in the area of the flusher tanks.
Analytical results from a subsequent soil sampling event indicated that volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
were present at elevated concentrations along the property line between Cooper Drum and Tweedy
Elementary School. Analytical results from soil sampling events conducted in 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992,
1994, 1996, and 1998, and a soil gas sampling event in 1999, indicate that VOCs are also present at
elevated concentrations in soils beneath the concrete floor of the reconditioning facility, proximal to the
holding tanks and clarifiers, in the former hard wash area, and in other areas of the site.
 
Analytical results from 1996 and 1998 monitoring well ground water sampling events and a 1998
Hydropunch(TM) ground water sampling event indicate the presence of VOCs at concentrations
significantly above background levels in the two uppermost aquifers (Bellflower and Exposition aquifers)
beneath and hydraulically downgradient of the former hard wash area. The Bellflower, Exposition, and
Gage aquifers are interconnected within 2 miles of the Cooper Drum Company site. Eleven municipal
drinking water wells, which draw from the Exposition and Gage aquifers, are located within 4 miles of the
site.
 
Status (June 2001) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
