COPLEY SQUARE PLAZA
Copley, Ohio
Summit County
13th Congressional District
 
Site Location/Size :
  Copley Square Plaza is located approximately 2.1 miles east and southeast of Copley, Ohio, in Summit
County. The property is located on a tract of land approximately 3 acres in size.
 
Site History :
  In April 1990, Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA) responded to a complaint regarding an
odor in the water from two wells on a property in Copley Square Plaza, a commercial/retail center. OEPA
representatives sampled the wells and found the ground water to be contaminated. Danton Dry Cleaners, a
business located within Copley Square Plaza, was identified as a source of the contamination. From 1963
to 1994, Danton Dry Cleaners performed dry cleaning operations using various solvents common to the
industry, including tetrachloroethylene (PCE).
 
Site Contamination/Contaminants :
  OEPA found the ground water to be contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), including
PCE. In addition, OEPA identified below grade tanks/pits within the dry cleaner business which contained
water contaminated with solvents, including PCE, trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, and multiple
forms of dichloroethene (DCE).
 
Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment :
  Ground water contamination is present above drinking water maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) in
nine residential wells adjacent to Copley Square Plaza. This ground water contamination is affecting 26
people.Ground water and soil contamination beneath the dry cleaner continues to impact ground water in
the area. Ground water contamination has been detected below MCLs in three additional residential wells
and the community water supply well of a 104-resident nursing home.
 
Response Activities (to date) :
  At the request of OEPA, and in response to the elevated concentrations of VOCs found in residential
wells, from August 1994 to April 1995, EPA Region 5 Emergency Response Program removed
approximately 8,000 gallons of solvent-contaminated wastewater from the concrete pits, installed a shallow
ground water recovery trench to collect contaminated ground water that accumulates around and beneath
the building foundation, and installed eight residential water treatment systems as a temporary alternate
water supply. In April 1995, OEPA assumed the responsibility for maintaining both the trench system and
the eight residential water treatment systems.
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated
with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent
of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
