NPL Site Narrative for Cornhusker Army
Ammunition Plant
 
CORNHUSKER ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT
Hall County, Nebraska
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant is in Hall County,
Nebraska, approximately 3 miles west of the City of Grand Island. The facility, which is owned by the U.S.
Army and operated by a contractor, operated intermittently in 1942-73 to produce bombs, shells, boosters,
and mines. It is now in standby status.
 
Wastes containing trinitrotoluene (TNT) and RDX, an experimental explosive, have been disposed through
cesspools, leach pits, burning, and burial at many locations at the facility. The wastes have contaminated
the aquifer that is the sole source of drinking water for residents in the area. The Army has supplied bottled
water to residences whose wells were contaminated and provided funds to the City of Grand Island to
extend its municipal water system to serve affected residences. Surface waters have not been affected to
date.
 
The hazardous waste site consists of a major portion of the plant containing the manufacturing area -- load
lines 1 through 5, the magazine areas, and the shop area; and waste disposal areas -- the sanitary landfill,
demolition area, and burn ground area; and the contaminated aquifer extending east of the plant. The site
covers over 9 square miles.
 
The plant area is underlain by moderately to highly permeable unconsolidated deposits which yield large
quantities of good quality ground water for drinking water, agriculture, and industry. Most of the land
surrounding the site is used for agriculture and is under irrigation during much of the growing season. The
surface is drained through intermittent streams, with the closest continuously flowing water body 5 miles
away.
 
The plant is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary survey) is underway.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : In December 1986, the extension of the Grand Island Water system was
completed.
 
The Army has identified sources of contamination within the plant, and later in 1987 intends to start
incinerating soil contaminated with explosives. The Army is now evaluating alternatives to clean up
contaminated ground water. Over 500 private wells have been contaminated to date.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, including this specific NPL site, there are no areas subject to
the Subtitle C corrective action authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. Therefore, this
Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
