NPL Site Narrative for Cornell Dubilier
Electronics, Inc.
 
CORNELL DUBILIER ELECTRONICS, INC.
South Plainfield, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 1997) : The Cornell Dubilier Electronics Inc (CDE) site consists of a
25-acre property on Hamilton Boulevard in South Plainfield, Middlesex County, New Jersey. CDE tested
transformer oils on the property for an unknown period of time until the company vacated the property in
1961. The property is currently occupied by the Hamilton Industrial Park, which consists of approximately
15 small industries. It has been alleged that during CDE's period of operation, the company dumped
transformer oil contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) directly onto site soils. A former
employee has claimed that the rear of the property was saturated with PCB-contaminated transformer
oils and that transformers were also buried behind the facility during the same time period. New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) personnel visited the site on March 12, 1985 and noted
in the back of the facility contained a black soil unnatural to the area. In 1988, a response letter was
delivered to the NJDEP by a law firm representing CDE, which indicated that small accidental leaks or
spills of PCBs occurred at the site property and that liquid-liquid-vapor degreasers were utilized during
processes conducted at the site. Trichloroethylene (TCE) was the degreasing agent admitted to be used.
The letter also indicated that residual wastes from the on-site processes may have been landfilled on the
site property. NJDEP personnel noted that four large black tanks were present on the edge of a large filled-
in area situated in the rear of the site. The tanks were at the top of an embankment leading down to the
unnamed tributary to Bound Brook. Five large tanks were observed in this area by EPA on March 30, 1994
and again on June 8, 1994. The tanks were removed from the site prior to the HRS sampling event.
 
Several metals, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and a PCB were detected in the soil and sediment
samples collected as part of a September 11, 1986 Site Inspection (SI). Soil, surface water and sediment
samples were also sampled as part of a SIP conducted by EPA on June 8, 1994. The results indicated
concentrations of PCBs and TCE in the site soils significantly above background levels. From a sampling
event conducted on February 29, 1996, PCB, alpha-Chlordane, and TCE were detected in the site soils
sampled at levels significantly above background. PCBs were detected in sediment samples at levels
significantly above background.
 
The PCB contamination detected in the sediments of the unnamed tributary to Bound Brook documents
the actual contamination of a surface water body. Additionally, the actual contamination of greater than 0.1
mile of wetland frontage in the unnamed tributary to Bound Brook was documented. At least two fisheries
are known to exist within the target distance limit for the surface water pathway.
 
A significant number of people obtain their drinking water from the Middlesex and Elizabethtown Water
Companies, both of which operate potable water supply wells within four miles of the site. The majority of
the wells tap the Brunswick Shale Formation, although eight of Middlesex Water Company's 31 wells tap
the overburden aquifer. Approximately 60 residential potable water supply wells were sampled and results
indicated levels of TCE in excess of the Maximum Contaminant Level established for that substance.
However, there is no quality assurance/quality control documentation available for the analytical data and
no monitoring wells are present on or downgradient of the CDE site that could establish the presence of
a groundwater plume. To date, 93 residences have been connected to the local municipal water supply
system and future connections are planned.
 
Status (July 1998) : On March 21, 1997 and June 9, 1997, EPA conducted sampling of the interiors of two
buildings on site. Elevated levels of PCBs and metals were found. The owners were subsequently asked
to take actions to reduce the potential for exposure to contaminants on-site and limit the movement of
contaminants off-site. Activities conducted at the site include paving large areas of the property; shut down
of a truck driving school; fencing of the site to restrict access and prevent the tracking of PCBs off-site and
into the community and; installation of drainage control to limit the movement of contaminants to Bound
Brook through surface water run-off.
 
Soil and indoor dust samples collected in October and November 1997 from residential properties adjacent
to the site also indicated the presence of PCB. EPA conducted cleaning of the interiors of several homes
in April of 1998. Sampling in the residential community surrounding the site was expanded to determine if
health concerns exist for residents of neighboring properties and to identify areas for further investigation.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
