NPL Site Narrative for Crazy Horse
Sanitary Landfill
 
CRAZY HORSE SANITARY LANDFILL
Salinas, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Crazy Horse Sanitary Landfill is on Crazy Horse Canyon
Road within the southeastern portion of the hilly region in Salinas in northern Monterey County, California.
The 125-acre site is owned by the City of Salinas and operated by Salinas Disposal Services. Prior to
1950, the site operated as an open burning dump. Since 1950, it has been a sanitary landfill. In 1977,
it received a permit from the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB) to accept
residential, commercial, and nonhazardous industrial wastes. Some pesticide containers have been
disposed of at the facility after triple-rinsing as required by California law. The CRWQCB permit prohibits
accepting hazardous waste. According to Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., its plant in Salinas disposed of
large quantities of "banbury" wastes (which include rubber materials, carbon black, other fillers, and oils)
and mixed solvents (mainly benzene and toluene) at the site from the early 1970s to about 1982.
 
In February 1985, CRWQCB sampled three downgradient residential wells. They were found to be
contaminated with volatile organic chemicals, including benzene and toluene. An estimated 6,200 people
obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
A consultant to the City of Salinas conducted an extensive ground water investigation in March 1985 to
determine if the site is a source of the off-site residential well contamination. The consultant concluded that
the site is one of the sources. However, the analytical results suggested that there may be a secondary
source on private property adjacent to the landfill. Following the investigation, Salinas started to implement
a system to clean up contaminated ground water.
 
In June 1987, Salinas purchased the homes with contaminated wells and bulldozed them. The city also
pumped water from wells in an attempt to stabilize the ground water contamination.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In May 1989, Salinas completed the ground water system, which involves
pumping contaminated ground water to the surface via 23 extraction wells, passing it through a passive air
stripper, and treating the gases removed in the stripper with activated carbon before they are discharged to
the atmosphere. Some treated water is injected into the subsurface and some is used in dust control. EPA
continues to monitor the remedial work at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
