 OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
  NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST (NPL)  
***Final Site***    December 2013 
CRISTEX DRUM Oxford, North Carolina Granville County 
  Site Location: The Cristex Drum site is a 22-acre property with a 150,000 square-foot former manufacturing building, located in an industrial area on Industry Drive in Oxford, North Carolina.   Site History: The business was operated as a warp knit fabric mill from 1965 to 1986. The mill changed names over the years from Steinfeld Mills to IMI Knits and then finally to Cristex, Inc., in 1981. The mill engaged in knitting, dyeing and finishing of nylon acetate Tricot and dry cleaning of the manufactured fabrics. Since 1986 the building has been used primarily as warehouse space.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: There are observed releases of tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), dichloroethene (DCE), vinyl chloride, benzene, chlorobenzene and heavy metals to soils and ground water from the former textile operations. The majority of the soil contamination is located underneath the building. A wastewater lagoon which received several spills from the facility is located on the property. In 1998, the lagoon dam was breached, releasing approximately 400,000 gallons of contaminated lagoon contents to surface water.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: PCE concentrations are increasing in deep monitoring wells and may pose a risk to private and/or commercial drinking water wells to the south and east. The southeastern edge of the ground water plume is uncharacterized and may present increased vapor intrusion risk for the nearby Oak Ridge apartments. Observed releases of lead, chromium, manganese, vanadium and nickel have been documented in the adjacent wetlands, and the breached lagoon continues to discharge to surface water.   Response Activities (to date): The EPA conducted an emergency removal of 26 buried drums and 137 drum carcasses discovered at the rear of the property in 1997. The former building owners had attempted site characterization and removal of two above-ground storage tanks and an oil water separator beneath the building under the State Inactive Hazardous Sites program. These former owners withdrew from the program in 2004 because of lack of funding.   Need for NPL Listing: The state of North Carolina referred the site to the EPA to allow for a comprehensive cleanup to address all the human health and environmental risks posed by the site. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
       
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at  http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
