CROWN VANTAGE LANDFILL
Alexandria Township, New Jersey
Hunterdon County
7th Congressional District
 
Site Location/Size :
  The Crown Vantage Landfill site is an inactive industrial landfill located off Milford-Frenchtown Road
(County Route 619) in Alexandria Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey. The site encompasses
approximately 10 acres within the floodplain of the Delaware River.
 
Site History :
  Waste deposition activities at the site began in the late 1930s and continued until the early 1970s.
Background information indicates that the site has been inactive since that time. The landfill was used
by previous owners for the deposition of wastes generated at a paper mill, including flyash and drums
containing press room wastes (varnish, shellac, methyl ethyl ketone (MEK), inks, and dyes).
 
Site Contamination/Contaminants :
  Surface soil, flyash, and sediment samples indicate that site-attributable contaminants have been
released to the Delaware River. Surface soil samples contain semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs),
PCBs, and metals (including barium, chromium, and lead) at elevated concentrations. Flyash samples
reveal elevated concentrations of SVOCs, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Metals
detected at elevated concentrations in flyash samples include lead and chromium. PAHs were also
detected in soil at concentrations exceeding screening levels.
 
Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment :
  The Delaware River adjacent to and downstream of the site is used for fishing. Surface soil, sediment,
and flyash samples collected in November 2003 document a release of contaminants into the surface
water and actual contamination of the Delaware River in areas used for fishing. Potential receptors of
contamination within 15 miles downstream include approximately 1.8 miles of wetland frontage, one State-
listed threatened species habitat, and two Federally-listed threatened species habitats. In addition, the
Lower Delaware River, downstream of Alexandria Township, is a National Wild and Scenic River.
 
Response Activities (to date) :
  EPA completed shoring up specific areas of the landfill in November 2004, after the bank of the landfill
was substantially damaged by flood waters associated with summer hurricanes. In addition to shoring up
areas where the landfill collapsed, EPA placed warning signs along the perimeter. While the Agency's
actions addressed the most severely damaged sections of the landfill, the entire landfill face will need
stabilization in order to minimize the potential for further damage. In early April, 2005, the Delaware River,
at a gauging station closest to the landfill, peaked 11 feet over flood stage due to a surge of spring rainfall;
this was the third highest crest recorded at that location in the past 160 years at that location. On April
5, 2005, EPA observed potential areas of erosion and two subsidences several feet in depth at one part
of the landfill after the flooding. Water levels remained high restricting observations; however, the areas
stabilized previously by EPA, that were viewable, appear to have held. EPA will continue the process of
assessing the flood damage for potential response actions.
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated
with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent
of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
