NPL Site Narrative for CTS Printex, Inc.
 
CTS PRINTEX, INC.
Mountain View, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : CTS Printex, Inc., manufactured printed circuit boards on 5.6
acres in Mountain View, Santa Clara County, California, during 1966-85. Printex was incorporated in 1966
and acquired by CTS Corp. in 1981.
 
In the "wet-floor" building at 1911 Plymouth Street, acid waste water containing copper, lead, and organic
wastes containing trichloroethylene (TCE) and other solvents drained to the floor, collected in a sump
where they were neutralized with ammonia, and discharged to the Mountain View sanitary sewer.
 
Early in 1985, a consultant to CTS Corp. found high levels of copper and lead in soil near the wet-floor
building and high levels of TCE, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, and 1,1-dichloroethylene in monitoring wells
downgradient of the site. An estimated 189,000 people obtain drinking water from municipal wells within 3
miles of the site. Permanente Creek borders the site. Surface water drainage eventually discharges to San
Francisco Bay 2.5 miles to the north.
 
Late in 1985, the company excavated the sump area and filled it in, decontaminated the building, and
transported waste materials to a hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). In October 1986, the California Department of Health Services
certified closure of the facility.
 
In an attempt to stop migration of contaminated ground water off-site, the company is pumping the water
and discharging it to Mountain View's sanitary sewer system under a city permit. The company continues
to monitor to define the plume of contaminated ground water.
 
In March 1987, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB) issued a Cleanup and
Abatement Order requiring the company to be more expeditious and thorough in its cleanup and set a
schedule for various on- and off-site tasks.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : CTS Printex is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. In
November 1989, CRWQCB received the first draft of the RI/FS for review. The final draft is scheduled to be
submitted in late 1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
