 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in thi s narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs ca n be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2012 
 CTS OF ASHEVILLE , INC.  Asheville, N orth Carolina  
 Buncombe County  
 
 Site Location: 
The CTS of Asheville, Inc. site is located at 235 Mills Gap Road in Asheville, North Carolina. The property was once part of a 66.4-acre tract that was subsequently portioned off during numerous ownership changes . The plant was a large, one- story brick building located at the northeast corner of the property, fronting Mills Gap Road. The building was demolished in December 2011, leaving the concrete pad intact.  
 Site History: 
The CTS of Asheville, Inc. site was operated as an electronic components manufacturing facility and electroplating facility from 1952 until 1985. The facility is vacant and is surrounded by fencing. Trichloroethene (TCE) was used in processes at the facility and was released through drains in the building.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
There is subsurface soil contamination below the building footprint and extending to the south, which is serving as a continued source of ground water contamination in the area. The highest TCE concentration in soils (830,000 parts per billion) was found at a depth of 32-34 feet beneath the building. TCE contamination in ground water has not been fully characterized, and is migrating from the site in an uncontrolled plume in fractured bedrock. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
More than 105 private drinking water wells are at risk within a mile of the site.  The EPA has identified seven private drinking water supplies (one spring-fed and six wells) contaminated with TCE, and has provided alternative drinking water to these residents.    
 Response Activities (to date): 
In 2004, the EPA entered into an administrative order on consent (AOC) with two potentially responsible parties (PRPs) to perform a time-critical removal action at the site. In response to the AOC, the PRPs constructed a soil vapor extraction (SVE) system which utilized a series of extraction wells and vacuum to extract volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from soils beneath the building. The system was completed in 2006, and is estimated to have removed more than 6,000 pounds of solvent. The EPA continues to monitor approximately 100 private drinking water wells quarterly.     
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of North Carolina referred the site to the EPA because of the contamination detected below the building and because of the ground water contamination which PRPs are not addressing. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter from the state supporting listing of the site on the NPL.   
