NPL Site Narrative for Curcio Scrap Metal,
Inc.
 
CURCIO SCRAP METAL, INC.
Saddle Brook Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : Curcio Scrap Metal, Inc., is a small scrap metal yard in
Saddle Brook Township, Bergen County, New Jersey. The site is in a small industrial area surrounded by a
medium-density residential area.
 
On at least one occasion, the company received a shipment of electrical transformers, salvaging the
copper and baling the remaining metal. During the cutting of the transformers, oil containing PCBs spilled
onto the ground, according to an inspection conducted by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) in September 1983. An area covering about 200 square feet was blackened with oil.
Soil from the area contains PCBs, primarily Aroclor 1260, according to NJDEP. Run-off from the site, taken
from a drainage ditch at the rear of the property, also contains PCBs.
 
Site soils are relatively permeable, which facilitates movement of contaminants into ground water. The site
is above the Brunswick formation, one of the State's most important and extensive aquifers. The fractures
in the aquifer, which is at a depth of about 20 feet, facilitate movement of ground water from the site. About
93,000 people depend on public and private wells within 3 miles of the site as their sole source of drinking
water. A private well is about 300 feet southwest of the site.
 
In September 1986, EPA completed a search for companies and individuals potentially responsible for
wastes associated with the site and sent them letters requesting information about the site.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA plans to send notice letters to the potentially responsible parties informing
them of their potential liability.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
