 
   
   
  
   
     
   
   
   
   
   
  
 
 
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2009 
CURTIS SPECIALTY PAPERS, INC. Milford, New Jersey Hunterdon County 
Site Location: The Curtis Specialty Papers, Inc. site is located in Milford, Hunterdon County, New Jersey. Site History: The Curtis Specialty Papers, Inc. site is an abandoned paper mill occupying approximately 40 acres.  The property consists of a complex of buildings, including the main m ill building, former coatings facility, a cogeneration power plant, and a wastewater treatment plant.  The paper m ill operated on the property for approximately 90 years.  The main mill, known as the Milford Mill, consists of approximately 61 separate areas.  The Milford Mill converted paper pulp to finished food grade paper. The former coatings facility is located approximately 400 feet northwest of the main Milford Mill building.  The coatings facility operated from approximately 1935 to 1988 where solvent-based resins were compounded and coated onto paper and other products.  Site Contamination/Contaminants: The primary contaminant is polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).  PCBs have been detected in soil located within areas at the facility and Quequacommisacong Creek. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: PCBs have been detected in Quequacommisacong Creek whic h is a fishery and provides habitat for federal and state threatened species. Response Activities (to date): In August 2001, Curtis Specialty Papers submitted a preliminary assessment report and remedial investigation work plan to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Pr otection (NJDEP) as part of the State’s Industrial Site Recovery Act. The company identified 20 areas of concern at the Curtis Specialty Papers, Inc. site.  In July 2003, Curtis Specialty Papers shut down its operations and declared bankruptcy.  The facility was abandoned and left unsecured. On October 20, 2006, NJDEP and their emergency response contractor began activities that included securing oil and hazardous materials containers, classifying materials for waste disposal, inspecting above ground storage tanks, collecting and stowing empty containers at the former hazardous materials storage area, and transporting and disposing of materials.  Approximately two dozen drums and lab packs were removed from the facility.   Need for NPL Listing: The State of New Jersey referred the site to EPA. Other federal and st ate programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time.  The State has written a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL.    
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
