NPL Site Narrative for Darling Hill Dump
 
DARLING HILL DUMP
Lyndon, Vermont
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Darling Hill Dump occupies approximately 3.5 acres at the
top of a steep hill in a rural area along the west side of Darling Hill Road in the northeast portion of the
Town of Lyndon, Caledonia County, Vermont.
 
During 1952-72, the Village of Lyndonville operated the dump on leased land, disposing mixed municipal
and industrial wastes. During 1972-83, the dump was leased and operated by Ray O. Parker and Son,
Inc., of Lyndonville, and was used mainly for disposal of scrap wood, metal, demolition materials, and
industrial wastes. Parker purchased the property in October 1983 and continues to use the dump primarily
for disposal of wood and metal debris.
 
About 92,000 gallons of liquid industrial wastes and 2,000 tons of liquid, semiliquid, and solid industrial
wastes, including metal plating rinse water, alkali degreasers, and organic solvents, were placed in the
unlined dump. According to the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation (VT DEC), the wastes
came from Vermont Tap and Die, Northeast Tool (both a part of Vermont American Corp. and both in
Lyndonville), and from EHV-Weidmann (in nearby St. Johnsbury). Liquids and sludges were dumped
directly onto the ground.
 
Since 1982, the Vermont Department of Health has detected low levels of volatile organic compounds,
including trichloroethylene, 1,2-dichloroethylene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and 1,1,1-trichloroethane, in the
village water supply. The formation beneath the dump consists mainly of sand and gravel. Depth to ground
water is in excess of 100 feet. The village well field serving 3,200 people is 2,600 feet southwest of the
dump. An additional 460 people use private wells within 3 miles of the dump.
 
Approximately 300 feet west of the dump and down a steep hill is the West Branch of the Passumpsic
River. It flows southward for approximately 3,000 feet to where it meets the East Branch of the Passumpsic
River. The river is used for recreational fishing and canoeing.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : The dump is no longer in operation.
 
In March 1989, EPA issued a report stating that the Darling Hill Dump is the most likely source of
contaminants of the village well field.
 
EPA conducted a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site and has
begun negotiations with several of them.
 
EPA emergency staff has evaluated the site and determined that a removal action is not warranted at this
time.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
