NPL Site Narrative for Davisville Naval
Construction Battalion Center
 
DAVISVILLE NAVAL CONSTRUCTION BATTALION CENTER
North Kingstown, Rhode Island
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Davisville Naval Construction Battalion Center (NCBC) is
18 miles south of Providence in North Kingstown, Washington County, Rhode Island. The area is primarily
single-family residential. A military installation since World War II, the site assumed its current name in
1951. Its primary mission is to provide mobilization support to Naval construction forces.
 
NCBC consists of four areas: the Main Center located on Narragansett Bay; West Davisville Storage area
located 3 miles west of the Main Center; Camp Fogarty, a former training center located 4 miles west of the
Main Center; and the decommissioned Naval Air Station Quonset Point to the south of the Main Center,
which was given to the Rhode Island Port Authority in 1974. The Navy has disposed of wastes in all four
areas.
 
NCBC is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. Under IRP, the Navy has identified at least 24 areas potentially containing hazardous
substances. The Navy's investigations are focusing primarily on two areas: the Allen Harbor Landfill
in the Main Center, which received solvents, paint thinners, degreasers, PCBs from transformers,
sewage sludge, and contaminated fuel oil during 1946-72; and the Calf Pasture Landfill, which received
"decontaminating agents" and various other contaminants.
 
Several of the 24 potentially contaminated areas are no longer owned by the Navy and are being
investigated by the Army Corps of Engineers' former facility program. The primary area the Corps is
investigating is the Camp Avenue Landfill, which is part of the decommissioned Naval Air Station Quonset
Point. During 1943-53, the landfill accepted drums of wastes, battery casings, and other wastes.
 
Ground water is shallow (2-4 feet in some areas) and soils permeable, conditions that facilitate movement
of contaminants into ground water. An estimated 27,000 people obtain drinking water from public wells
within 3 miles of hazardous substances on NCBC.
 
IRP studies conducted in 1986 identified lead, cadmium, silver, mercury, and chromium in soil from
the shoreline and sediments of Allen Harbor, which is a small inlet from Narragansett Bay. Clams are
harvested from Allen Harbor. A fresh water wetland is adjacent to the Camp Avenue Landfill.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : A remedial investigation is underway to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site. A draft report on the work is scheduled to be completed in mid-1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
