NPL Site Narrative for Davis Timber
Company
 
DAVIS TIMBER COMPANY
Hattiesburg, Mississippi
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (May 11, 2000) : The site encompasses a 30-acre property formerly used
by the Davis Timber Company for timber processing and wood preserving. The property is located
on Jackson Road, approximately 3 miles northwest of Hattiesburg, Lamar County, Mississippi. The
site is being proposed to the NPL because investigations conducted while the facility was operational
indicated that hazardous substances associated with the wood treating process, pentachlorophenol (PCP),
chlorodibenzofurans, and dioxins, have caused fish kills and contaminated fisheries and recreational areas
in nearby surface waters.
 
Davis Timber Company conducted timber processing and wood preserving operations at the facility
from 1972 until 1987, when the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) ordered Davis
Timber Company to discontinue wood preserving operations. According to MDEQ, Davis Timber Company
subsequently declared bankruptcy in 1990. The property is presently owned by Lamar Industries, which
has continued debarking operations; however, no wood preserving operations are presently conducted
at the property. The former facility was comprised of a skag mill, debarker, pole peeler, holding pond,
office, treating cylinder, cooling pond, oil separator, two above ground oil storage tanks, two above
ground PCP solution storage tanks, and a storage yard. Davis Timber Company operations included bark
removal, wood treatment using PCP, and product storage. Davis Timber Company discharged wastewater
containing PCP into a holding pond approximately 2 acres in size. In 1980, the facility's holding pond was
closed, backfilled, and capped with approximately 6 to 8 inches of clay.
 
Surface water runoff from the property flows to the north into two intermittent tributaries of Mineral Creek,
East Mineral Creek and West Mineral Creek. The tributaries flow north into Country Club Estates Lake, a
66-acre lake located approximately 1.25 miles downstream of the facility. Mineral Creek flows from Country
Club Estates Lake north northeast for approximately 4 miles and feeds a privately owned lake just prior
to converging with the Bowie River, which flows southeast approximately 4.75 miles and enters the Leaf
River.
 
Country Club Estates Lake is a recreational fishery and designated recreation area. Between December
1974 and January 1987, MDEQ documented numerous fish kills in Country Club Estates Lake. Several
of the fish kills were attributed to documented releases of PCP from the holding pond at the Davis Timber
Company facility. In 1988, in response to the PCP contamination, MDEQ issued an advisory against
fishing for commercial purposes and against consuming fish caught from Country Club Estates Lake.
However, residents of Country Club Estates continued to fish in the lake. In addition, the privately owned
lake, located near the confluence of Mineral Creek and Bowie River, is fished and used for recreational
purposes. Both the Bowie and Leaf Rivers are heavily fished for consumption. There are also two surface
water intakes located along the Bowie River and one surface water intake located along the Leaf River.
These intakes are used for industrial purposes. An additional intake along Mineral Creek is used for
recreational purposes.
 
PCP, chlorodibenzofurans, and dioxins have been detected at elevated levels in Country Club Estates
Lake and in the intermittent creeks leading from the facility to Country Club Estates Lake. The area
surrounding the former Davis Timber Company property is rural. No other industries or companies are
located in the vicinity of the property that could have contributed to the fish kills and type of contamination
found in West Mineral Creek, East Mineral Creek, or Country Club Estates Lake.
 
Status (July 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
