NPL Site Narrative for Davis Park Road
TCE
 
DAVIS PARK ROAD TCE
Gastonia, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 28, 1998) : The Davis Park Road TCE site (DPR) is located on Davis Park
Road between Hudson Boulevard and Dogwood Avenue west of the City of Gastonia within the Gastonia
Extra Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) area. The site is designated by contaminated wells at three private
residences and a subdivision that have been impacted by a contaminated groundwater plume. The site
can be found on the Gastonia South, North Carolina USGS 7.5' Quadrangle Map at latitude 35 degrees 13
minutes 56 seconds N and 81 degrees 13 minutes 08 seconds W.
 
In March of 1990 during routine sampling of the community well at the Cedar Oak Park Subdivision, and
again in April 1990, high levels of trichloroethylene (TCE) and tetrachloroethylene (PCE)were detected in
the ground water. During follow-up sampling by the Gaston County Health Department (GCH), three other
private residential wells were also found to be contaminated. The North Carolina Division of Environmental
Management performed extensive sampling of the private wells in the vicinity of the site from May 1990 to
August 1992.
 
Most of the domestic water supplies, industrial supplies, and several municipal supplies in Gaston County
are obtained from wells. Dug wells, usually found in older, rural areas, derive their water from the saprolite,
which is the weathered and disintegrated zone between the soil and the unweathered bedrock. Drilled
wells, used for higher yields for industry and municipal use, obtain their water from either granite or schist
formations. According to the former hydrogeologist for the Gaston County Health Department, the saprolite
and the fractured bedrock act as a single hydrologic unit.
 
During subsequent investigations by the North Carolina Superfund Section, efforts were made to locate
the source of the contaminated ground water plume, however no conclusive evidence, neither historical
documentation nor environmental sampling, has been able to determine the source.
 
Status (January 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
