NPL Site Narrative for Dayco Corp./L.E.
Carpenter Co.
 
DAYCO CORP./L.E. CARPENTER CO.
Wharton Borough, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : Dayco Corp./L.E. Carpenter Co. manufactures vinyl-coated wall
coverings on a site of about 2 acres in Wharton Borough, Morris County, New Jersey. Prior to 1970, the
company disposed of polyvinyl chloride sludge by burying it in drums.
 
In January 1982, Dayco Corp./L.E. Carpenter Co. and the State entered into an Administrative Consent
Order requiring the company to remove the sludge, study ground water contamination, and decontaminate
ground water. Later in the year, the company removed approximately 4,000 cubic yards of sludge and soil
in the rear of the property.
 
In 1983, an engineering firm hired by the company studied ground water and prepared a proposal to
decontaminate it. The firm estimated that approximately 20,000 gallons of recoverable organic solvents are
floating on the ground water beneath the site. Additional investigations are underway.
 
The facility is located in the floodplain of the Rockaway River, a recharge area for the unconsolidated
Quaternary Aquifer, which is designated a sole source of drinking water for the Rockaway River Basin
area. Dover Township wells and Wharton Borough wells serving 27,000 people are within 3 miles of the
plant.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : In September 1986, the State and Dayco Corp./L.E. Carpenter Co. entered into an
Administrative Consent Order requiring the company to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study
to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
Additional field work is expected to start in late summer 1987.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
