NPL Site Narrative for Defense General
Supply Center
 
DEFENSE GENERAL SUPPLY CENTER
Chesterfield County, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Defense General Supply Center (DGSC) is located in
a suburban area in Chesterfield County in eastern Virginia, 2 miles south of the Richmond city limit and 1
mile west of the James River. It is a part of the Defense Logistics Agency. DGSC manages and furnishes
general military supplies to the Armed Forces and several Federal civilian agencies. The 0.5-square-mile
site includes a hazardous waste landfill, a fire training pit, and storage areas where hazardous substances
were spilled.
 
Several hazardous substances associated with the site have contaminated ground water on and off
the site, according to tests conducted by DGSC. Contaminants detected include chloroform, methylene
chloride, dichlorobenzene, di-, tri-, and tetrachloroethylene, and chromium.
 
DGSC is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense (DOD) seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. DOD has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary survey) is
underway. Limited remedial work has been completed. The fire training pit has been drained, and the dike
surrounding it has been used as fill.
 
Other parts of DGSC acquired Interim Status under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
when DGSC filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : What DGSC hopes will be the final phase of DOD's equivalent of a remedial
investigation started in May 1985. This field work includes the installation of monitoring wells to define
upgradient contamination and to further define the sources of contamination. In addition to the monitoring
wells, many bore holes will be drilled to collect soil samples to confirm the existence and locations of
known or suspected contaminant sources. The investigation by DGSC includes both on-site and off-site
contamination.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of RCRA. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore,
this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
