NPL Site Narrative for Del Amo
 
DEL AMO
Los Angeles, California
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (December 1, 2000) : The Del Amo site should be placed on the National
Priorities List (NPL) because contaminated ground water beneath the site could effect water that people
drink. The Del Amo site is located within the Los Angeles city limits, Los Angeles County, California,
in proximity to the Cities of Torrance and Carson. From the early 1940s to the early 1970s, a 280-acre
synthetic rubber manufacturing facility operated on the property. The facility consisted of the following three
plants: a butidiene plant, a styrene plant, and a copolymer plant. The facility was dismantled in the early to
mid 1970s, and the property is currently occupied by a business park. The Montrose Chemical Corporation
NPL site is located approximately 600 feet west of the Del Amo site.
 
The 1998 Final Groundwater Remedial Investigation Report identified the following 12 areas of concern
for ground water contamination on the Del Amo site: 1) cyclohexane tanks associated with the former
copolymer plant in the northern portion of the site, 2) pits and trenches in the former copolymer plant area,
3) XMW-20 non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL) in the former styrene plant area in the western portion of
the site, 4) volatile organic compound (VOC) tanks associated with the former styrene finishing/benzene
purification unit, 5) VOC tanks and/or pipelines associated with the former styrene finishing unit, 6) tank
farm in the former styrene plant area, 7) VOC storage tanks associated with the former ethylbenzene
production unit number 1, 8) VOC storage tanks associated with the former ethylbenzene production unit
number 2, 9) utility tanks in the former styrene plant area, 10) waste pit area and underground petroleum
pipelines in the southern portion of the site, 11) underground benzene pipeline in the southeast portion of
the site, and 12) laboratory underground pipelines in the former butadiene plant area in the eastern portion
of the site. The Del Amo HRS Documentation Record focuses on two of these 12 areas of concern (the
XMW-20 NAPL and the waste pit area).
 
The XMW-20 NAPL is composed primarily of benzene (90 percent) with lesser quantities of toluene,
ethylbenzene, and styrene. It is located approximately 50 feet from the historic location of a 500,000-gallon
crude benzene storage tank and extends laterally over an area of approximately 17,500 feet. The NAPL is
limited to the saturated zone, occurring as isolated blobs in a smear zone that extends vertically from the
water table, at approximately 60 feet below ground surface, to 30 feet below the water table.
 
The waste pit area occupies approximately 3.7 acres in the southern portion of the site and consists of
six disposal pits (Pits 2A through 2F) and two evaporation ponds (Ponds 1B and 1C). The pits and ponds
received process wastes from the styrene manufacturing plant. The pits and ponds are currently covered
with fill material, weeds, and miscellaneous debris, and the 3.7-acre parcel is surrounded by a double
row of fences. Hazardous substances in the waste remaining in the pits and ponds include benzene,
ethylbenzene, and naphthalene. The pits and ponds are evaluated as two separate sources in the Del Amo
HRS Documentation Record.
 
Ground water proximal to the XMW-20 NAPL is contaminated with benzene at concentrations up
to 1,200,000 µg/L. Soils located beneath the waste pit area have come to be located below the top
of the water table, due to rising ground water levels. These soils are contaminated with the same
hazardous substances that are found in the waste remaining in the pits (e.g., benzene, ethylbenzene, and
naphthalene). There are 17 municipal drinking water wells within 4 miles of the Del Amo site.
 
Status (September 2002) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
