NPL Site Narrative for Delatte Metals
 
DELATTE METALS
Ponchatoula, Louisiana
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 28, 1998) : The Delatte Metals site is an aggregation of the inactive Delatte
Metals facility and the inactive Ponchatoula Battery Company. The site is located on Weinberger Road in
Ponchatoula, Tangipahoa Parish, Louisiana. The 19-acre site is bound by a tributary of Selser's Creek to
the north, private residences to the east and west, and Weinberger road to the south. The population within
1 mile is approximately 645. The two sites are aggregated because they are adjacent, performed identical
lead salvage operations, and generated the same type of waste material. The only difference in operational
procedures was that Delatte Metals operated a lead smelter to recover addition lead material. The facilities
shared a common drainage pathway, the northern tributary of Selser's Creek, and they contributed heavy
metal contamination to the tributary and Selser's Creek.
 
The Delatte Metals facility reportedly began operations in 1970 as the Fuscia Battery Company. The
Ponchatoula Battery Company moved its operation to the property north of Weinberger Road and adjacent
to the Delatte and Fuscia Battery Company between 1972 and 1978. Operations at the two facilities have
been described as the following: spent lead-acid batteries were transported to the site by trucks or railroad
cars. The batteries were cut open at the battery hammersaw mill and the acid was allowed to drain from
them. The waste liquid acid was directed into holding ponds at each site. No containment structures have
been observed at the holding ponds. The battery casings were then discarded on site. The lead was
recovered from the acid and smelted to form lead ingots, which were sold to lead recycling facilities located
throughout the southern United States and other countries.
 
Drainage from the facilities was channeled to Selser's Creek through various ditches. The northernmost
drainage ditch exited the Ponchatoula Battery Company property and immediately entered the Delatte
Metals property. Process water from the Ponchatoula Battery Company joined a drainage ditch on the
Delatte Metals property. This ditch exited the back portion of the Delatte Metals property through a slough
that emptied into Selser's Creek. In addition to investigations by EPA Region 6, Delatte Metals and the
Ponchatoula Battery Company have been investigated on several occasions by the Louisiana Stream
Commission (LSC), the Louisiana Wildlife and Fisheries Commission (LWFC), the Louisiana Department of
Health (LDH), the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources (LDNR), and the Louisiana Department of
Environmental Quality (LDEQ). The facility was issued several Notice of Violations and Compliance Orders
during its operational life. Discharges from the facilities showed a pH range from 0.55 to 2 during State and
EPA inspections.
 
Nine sources were evaluated at the Delatte Metals site during the HRS investigation: two battery chip
piles, two slag piles, a waste pile, a buried/backfilled surface impoundment, tote bags, a contaminated soil
area (former removal area), and the settling tank basin. Analytical samples collected from on-site soils,
piles, and the tote bags indicated the presence of heavy metals including arsenic, lead, and cadmium.
Analytical results obtained from ground water samples collected from monitoring wells around the surface
impoundment indicated the presence of arsenic, cadmium, and lead at concentrations that met observed
release criteria.
 
The pathway evaluated for this HRS evaluation was the surface water pathway. Drainage from the Delatte
Metals site enters three drainage ditches: the northern portion of the site drains into a tributary of Selser's
Creek. This tributary flows westward before it discharges into Selser's Creek. The second drainage is
located on the west property boundary and flows to the north before it discharges into the northern tributary
of Selser's Creek and then into Selser's Creek. The southern portion of the site drains into a drainage ditch
adjacent to Weinberger Road. This ditch flows west and discharges into Selser's Creek approximately
1/4 mile west of the site. An observed release of lead and cadmium to the surface water pathway was
documented by the analytical data from the sediment samples collected at the three probable points of
entry (PPEs).
 
Sensitive environments were documented within the 15-mile downstream target distance limit. The Joyce
Wildlife Management Area is located 1.4 miles downstream, and the Manchac Wildlife Management Area
is located 12.5 miles downstream. Wetlands were also identified in the 15-mile downstream target distance
limit.
 
Status (January 1999) : EPA Response and Prevention Branch is currently conducting a removal of onsite
sources. EPA is considering various remedial alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
