NPL Site Narrative for Delta Quarries &
Disposal, Inc./Stotler Landfill
 
DELTA QUARRIES & DISPOSAL, INC./STOTLER LANDFILL
Antis, Logan Townships, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Delta Quarries & Disposal, Inc./Stotler Landfill Site covers
40 acres in Antis and Logan Townships, Blair County, Pennsylvania. The area is rural and sparsely
populated. Since the 1960s, the site has disposed of municipal wastes. Originally, the site consisted of
two adjacent landfills--Stotler and Parshall-Kruise. They are now one large fill owned by Delta Quarries &
Disposal, Inc.
 
On-site wells and an off-site spring are contaminated with chlorine-containing organic chemicals, including
trichloroethylene, according to tests conducted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources (PA DER). Nearby residential wells contain low levels of the contaminants. About 1,500 people
obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site. Ground water flows to the northeast in the
direction of the Little Juniata River, which is within 3 miles of the site. The river is used for recreational
activities.
 
In November 1984, Delta Quarries entered into a Consent Order and Agreement with PA DER under which
the company covered the landfill with soil.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : On October 9, 1987, Delta Quarries entered into a Consent Order with EPA
under CERCLA Section 106. Under the order, the company is to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action. The work is scheduled to be completed in 1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
