OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site***  Septe mb er  2014  
  DELTA SHIPYARD    Houma, Louisiana 
  Terrebonne Parish 
Site Location:  
The former Delta  Shipyar d is located at 200 Dean Court in southe astern Houma, Terrebonne Parish, Louisiana.  The 
facility is loc ated in a mixed industrial and residential ar ea south of the city of Houma, Louisiana . 
Site History: 
Delta Shipya rd was a cleaning and repa ir faci lity for small cargo boats, fishing bo ats, and  oil bar ges. Oily waste from 
the
 cleaning pro cess was stored in several unlined earthen pits used as evaporation ponds. These pits were reported ly 
also used to dispose of oil field drilling materia l. Delta Shipya rd w as o wned by Delta Ironworks, Inc. The entire 
prop erty consisted of 165 acres and was home to seven divi sions of Delta Ironworks, including Delta Shipyard. 
Duri
ng the 1970s and 1980s, the propert y changed  hands through several merge rs and  sales. In January 201 2, the 
Louisiana Dep artment of Environmental Quality asked the EP A for a ss istance in  evaluating this site. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
Wetlands are contaminated with a rsenic, antimony, anthr acen e, barium, benzene, cadmium, chrom ium, ethylben zen e, 
fluo rene, lead, manganese, mercu ry, 2-methylnaphthalene, naphthalene, ph enanthrene, pyrene, o-xy lene and  m,p- 
xylene to the surfac e water pa thway.  In addition, thre e eva poration pits containing gr eate r than 30,000 cubic yards o f 
hazardous ma terial a re located in a wetland and may potentially re lease waste to n earby wa terways. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Large volu mes of waste remain on site, and hazardous substan ces have b een  found in ground water, surface wate r and 
soi
l. The closest residential property is located app roxima tely 400 feet we st of the op en pits. Without remediation 
of the sit
e, additional re leases to ground water, surface wate r and soil will continue. 
 Respon se Activities (to date):  
No response  actions have taken place. 
 Need for NPL Listi ng:  
The site w as referred to the EPA in 2012 from the state of Louisiana. Without l isting  the site, contamination will 
continue to pose a risk to human health and the environment. Other federal and sta te cleanup programs were 
evaluated, but a re not viable a t this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from 
the sta te. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may 
change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent 
FR notices.]  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to 
these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on 
the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42 -ATSDR or 1-888 -422-8737.
