NPL Site Narrative for Devil's Swamp Lake
 
DEVIL'S SWAMP LAKE
Scotlandville, Louisiana
 
 
The Devil's Swamp Lake site is located near Scotlandville, East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana, about
ten miles north of Baton Rouge, and is bordered by the northern portions of Bayou Baton Rouge to the
north, U.S. Highway 61 - (Scenic Highway), the Ewell farm, the former locations of Rollins Environmental
Services (LA), Inc., and the Baton Rouge barge harbor to the east, and the Mississippi River to the south
and west. This site is being proposed to the NPL based on a release of PCBs to fisheries and wetlands
located on the site.
 
Prior to the 1950's, the Devil's Lake area consisted of agricultural farms, pasture land, and timber land.
Numerous industrial facilities were constructed around the area in the 1960's through the 1970's. Rollins
Environmental Services operated a RCRA commercial hazardous waste disposal facility that began
receiving waste in 1971. Throughout the 1970's approximately 108 solid waste management units were
active on the original 202 acre site. Noncombustible and nonrecoverable wastes were incinerated,
stabilized, and/or landfilled at the site. The Rollins facility was also permitted under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), allowing Rollins to discharge treated wastewater and storm water
through two outfalls. Historically, both outfalls discharged effluent into the Rollins outfall ditch. Since the
early 1990s, Rollins now discharges the treated wastewater to the Mississippi River via pipeline, and
uncontaminated storm water runoff is discharged through the Rollins outfall ditch.
 
EPA has conducted numerous investigations in the area. In 1985 and 1986, the Louisiana Department
of Environmental Quality (LDEQ) collected sediment samples from the Rollins outfall ditch and Devil's
Swamp Lake. LDEQ reported that these samples contained polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). In 1986,
LDEQ also collected fish tissue samples from Devil's Swamp Lake. Analysis of these samples indicated
the bioaccumulation of PCBs and other hazardous substances in fish tissue. As a result of these analyses,
LDEQ and the Louisiana Department of Health and Human Resources (LDHRR) issued a fish consumption
advisory and posted warning signs around Devil's Swamp Lake.
 
EPA Region 6 has conducted expanded site inspections (ESIs) of Devil's Swamp Lake, Devil's Swamp,
and Bayou Baton Rouge. Sediment sample data obtained during the ESIs indicated concentrations of
PCBs in the Rollins outfall ditch, Devil's Swamp Lake, southern Devil's Swamp, and southern Bayou Baton
Rouge ranging from 76 to 13,200 micrograms per kilogram (µg/kg). Other hazardous substances were also
detected in the sediments. The most distant sediment sample was located 2.09 miles downstream of the
Rollins outfall ditch, and this sample met the criterion for an observed release. Therefore, the downstream
extent - beyond 2.09 miles - of PCB contamination attributable to Rollins has not been determined.
 
The main area of concern at the Devil's Swamp Lake site is an area of contaminated sediments located in
portions of the Rollins Outfall Ditch. PCB contamination has been documented in contaminated wetlands
and fisheries located downstream of the site. It is noted that Clean Harbors now owns and operated the
former Rollins facility. Cleanup activities under RCRA corrective action are being implemented with the
State approval on portions of the Rollins Outfall Ditch, up to a point where a railroad track and bridge
crosses over the old outfall ditch.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
