 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency  for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2011 
DEWEY LOEFFEL LANDFI LL Nassau , New York  
 Rensselaer County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Dewey Loeffel Landfill site, which consists of an inactive hazardous waste disposal area and associated releases, is  located in a rural portion of southern Rensselaer County, New York, approximately 15 miles southeast of Albany.  
 Site History: 
From 1952 to 1968, the facility was used for disposal of more than 46,000 tons of waste materials generated by several industries, including General Electric (GE), Bendix Corporation, and Schenectady Chemicals, Inc.  The waste materials  were dumped into a lagoon area, oil pit, and drum burial area.  Some drum contents were pumped onto the ground surface, and waste materials were also burned.  In 1968, after years of citizen complaints, documented downstream fish and cattle kills, and uncontrolled fires at the site, the State of New York ordered the operator  to stop discharges from the disposal facility and perform remedial activities.  T he operator completed some remedial measures by  1974, but continued to use the facility for waste oil transfer until 1980.  New York State Department of Environmental Conservation ( NYSDEC) has overseen remedial investigations and remedial actions by GE sin ce 1980.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Solvents, waste oils, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), scrap materials, sludge s, and solids were dumped at Dewey Loeffel Landfill. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Some hazardous substances, in particular PCBs, have migrated from the landfill to underlying aquifers and downstream surface water bodies, resulting in contamination of ground water, surface water, sediments, and several species of fish.  Nassau Lake and Valatie Kill are fisheries that have been closed due to the site-related PCB contamination.  There are 1.7 miles of wetlands located within the zone of contamination.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
By 1974, the operator covered and graded the drum disposal area, oil pit, and lagoon with soil, and construct ed drainage channels to control runoff.  In 1980, GE entered into an agreement with NYSDEC to perform additional investigation and remediation at the facility.  From 1982 to 1984, GE removed 500 surface drums and four 30,000-gallon oil storage tanks, and installed a NYSDEC-approved slurry wall, clay cap, and leachate collection system.  From 2001  to 2004, GE removed approximately 15,000 tons of PCB-contaminated soil and sediments from the site drainage-way between the facility and Nassau Lake.  In June and August 2009, EPA collected  sediment samples from downstream water bodies.  The analytical results indicated the continuing presence of PCBs in the former Mead Road Pond, Tributary T11A, Valatie Kill, and Nassau Lake.  
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of New York referred the site to EPA.  Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the s tate.  
