NPL Site Narrative for Diamond Head Oil
Refinery Div.
 
DIAMOND HEAD OIL REFINERY DIV.
Kearny, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 27, 2000) : The Diamond Head Oil Refinery Div. (Diamond Head) site
is located at 1401 Harrison Ave. in Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey. Currently, the site is inactive
and consists of undeveloped land that is bordered by Harrison Avenue to the north, entrance ramp M
of Interstate 280 (I-280) to the east, I-280 to the south, and Campbell Distribution Foundry to the west.
The site is comprised of wetland areas and drainage ditches, a small wetland/pond, a vegetated landfill
area along the western border of the site, and the remnants of the former Diamond Head Oil Refinery on
the eastern portion of the site. The abandoned refinery portion of the site contains various construction
debris, including foundations of the former on-site building and two former aboveground storage tanks. The
refinery is currently owned by the Hudson Meadows Urban Land Development Corporation (HMULDC). A
portion of the site is owned by HMULDC.
 
The Diamond Head Oil Refinery Div. was in operation from February 1, 1946 to early 1979. The facility
operated under several company names including PSC Resources, Inc., Ag-Met Oil Service, Inc., and
Newtown Refining Corporation. All of these companies were owned by Mr. Robert Mahler. In January
1985, Newtown Refining Corporation sold the property to Mimi Urban Development Corporation, which
changed its name to Hudson Meadows Urban Land Development Corporation.
 
During facility operations, two aboveground storage tanks and possibly underground pits were used
to store oily wastes. These wastes were intermittently discharged directly to adjacent properties,
including the wetland area to the south of the site, creating an oil lake. The New Jersey Department of
Transportation (NJDOT) acquired the property south of the refinery on March 6, 1968. In 1977, NJDOT
began construction of I-280 and was reported to have removed 9 million gallons of oil-contaminated water
and 200,000 to 250,000 cubic yards of oily sludge from the lake. The material was reportedly transported
to Newtown Refining Corporation's facility on Long Island to be recycled; however, there are no reports
stating that this recycling process occurred. It is also reported that during the construction of I-280, an
underground lake of oil-contaminated ground water was found extending from the eastern limits of the
NJDOT right-of-way to Frank's Creek on the west. It is reported that, prior to abandoning the refinery,
Diamond Head cleaned out the two aboveground tanks; however, there is no known documentation of
this activity. From the close of operations in 1979 until 1982, the abandoned refinery was not completely
fenced. During this time, it was reported that dumping of waste oils and other debris took place on site.
Refinement International Co. hired Eastern Chemical Co. to clean up the refinery in May 1982. In order to
do so, the material in the tanks was analyzed and found to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) at
a concentration of 206 parts per million (ppm). Subsequent analyses revealed the presence of PCBs at
concentrations over 3,100 ppm. Approximately 7,500 gallons of material were pumped out of the tanks and
disposed off site by a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) permitted Treatment, Storage,
and Disposal Facility (TSDF) by Resource Technology Service. Environmental Transport also removed 27
tons of contaminated soil in May 1982.
 
Background information indicates that previous investigations have been conducted at the Diamond
Head Oil Refinery Div. site. These investigations include a sampling event conducted by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP), an Environmental Site Characterization conducted
by Killam Associates, and a Site Inspection conducted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) Region II Field Investigation Team (FIT). During these investigations, ground water, surface water/
sediment, surface/subsurface soil, liquid waste and solid waste samples were collected. Analytical results
of these samples indicated the presence of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and semivolatile organic
compounds (SVOCs), pesticides, PCBs, and metals.
 
In December 1999 EPA conducted an Expanded Site Inspection (ESI) at the Diamond Head Oil Refinery
Div. site. During the ESI, EPA collected surface/subsurface soil and ground water samples from 20
borings advanced throughout the site. EPA also collected sediment samples from the on-site wetland/
pond area as well as from the wetland area extending along the southern perimeter of the site. Analytical
results indicated the presence of VOCs, SVOCs, pesticides, PCBs, and metals. An observed release to
surface water is documented by chemical analyses of sediment samples collected from wetlands along
the southern and western boundaries of the site. Level II concentration of lead and zinc are documented to
0.19 mile of wetland frontage located along the southern perimeter of the site.
 
Status (September 2002) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
