 
  
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** September 2016 
DORADO GROUND WATER 
CONTAMINATION  Dorado , Puerto Rico  
 
 Site Location: 
The Dorado Ground Water Contamination s ite is located in a mixed residential, commercial and industrial area in the municipality of Dorado, Puerto Rico. Dorado is situated along the northern coast and to the west of San Juan.
 
 
 Site History: 
The site consists of an area of ground water containing organic based solvents, but the contamination cannot be clearly attributed to any specific source or sources. Ground water wells are the primary suppliers to the  two active public water supply systems, Maguayo and Dorado Urbano, which are operated in Dorado by the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA). Wells in the Maguayo and Dorado Urbano systems have been contaminated since the 1980s. Some wells have been closed either temporarily or permanently due to the presence of these solvents.   
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Ground water is contaminated with organic based solvents, primarily tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and trichloroethylene (TCE), which are commonly used in commercial and industrial operations such as dry cleaning and metal degreasing. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The contaminated wells withdraw water from the upper aquifer of the North Coast Limestone Aquifer System. The upper aquifer is the principal source of fresh ground water in Dorado and historically has been the principal source of public and industrial water use in the region. The  ground water contamination affects drinking water supply wells in the Maguayo and Dorado Urbano public water systems, which are the source of drinking wat er for more than 67,000 people. 
 
 Response Activities (to date): 
Some wells have been closed temporarily or perman ently due to contamination. The Super Aqueduct is  being used to supplement the water supply.
 
 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The commonwealth of Puerto Rico referred this site to the EPA. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on  the NPL from the commonwealth of Puerto Rico. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources  and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
   
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
 
