NPL Site Narrative for Double Eagle
Refinery Co.
 
DOUBLE EAGLE REFINERY CO.
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Double Eagle Refinery Co. has been in operation since
1929 in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma County, Oklahoma, just north of the intersection of Highway 35 and
Highway 40. The facility is located between the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe Railyard and the North
Canadian River. Until approximately 1980, the facility re-refined used motor oils by acidulation, distillation,
and filtration. The facility now stores, dehydrates, and sells waste oils.
 
Approximately 2,500 cubic yards of waste oils contaminated with heavy metals are in a surface
impoundment and four ponds, some unlined or leaking. According to the company, the oils came from
truck fleets, garages, automobile dealers, industries, and city, State, and Federal agencies throughout the
State. In addition, waste solvents and other products were collected from major industrial companies in
Oklahoma such as Western Electric, Dayton Tire and Rubber Co., CMI Corp., 3-M Co., and Goodyear Tire
and Rubber Co., as well as the Federal Aviation Administration.
 
An estimated 28,000 people in Del City and Smith Village obtain drinking water from public and private
wells within 3 miles of the site. These wells draw from Garber-Wellington Formation. An on-site well serves
company employees. Ground water in the area is shallow (10-25 feet in some cases) and soils permeable,
conditions that facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water.
 
In 1986, EPA detected barium, lead, and zinc in soil in drainage paths to the east and west of the site
and in a pond to the east. These contaminants are probably the result of spills from the lagoons. Surface
waters in the area are used for recreational activities within 3 miles downstream of the site.
 
Because of past spills, people and animals can come into direct contact with hazardous substances.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA has evaluated the site and determined that emergency action is not
warranted at this time and has also conducted a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
