NPL Site Narrative for Douglass Road/
Uniroyal, Inc., Landfill
 
DOUGLASS ROAD/UNIROYAL, INC., LANDFILL
Mishawaka, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Douglass Road/Uniroyal, Inc., Landfill covers approximately
19 acres in St. Joseph County just north of Mishawaka, Indiana, near the corner of Douglass Road and
Grape Road. A residential area is to the west of the fenced site and a shopping complex is to the east.
 
The landfill is owned by Uniroyal, Inc., and was operated between 1954 and 1979. From 1954 to 1971,
solvents, fly ash, paper, wood stock, rubber, and plastic wrap were disposed of at the landfill, which was
unlined. Only fly ash was disposed of from 1971 to 1979. Uniroyal then covered the landfill with 1 foot of
topsoil and seeded it.
 
According to Uniroyal, some 6,000 barrels of waste were disposed of at the landfill, including methyl ethyl
ketone, tetrahydrofuran, toluene, cyclohexanone, and xylene.
 
The landfill is underlain by permeable soils and is located in an area of glacial sand and gravel deposits,
conditions that facilitate the movement of contaminants into ground water, as well as the rapid movement
of ground water. The South Bend Water Department has seven wells within 3 miles of the site that draw
from a sand and gravel aquifer at an average depth of 150 feet. Water from the wells is blended and
distributed to approximately 120,000 people.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : The Indiana Department of Environmental Management has drafted an order
under which Uniroyal will conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. EPA is reviewing the draft.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
