NPL Site Narrative for Dover Chemical
Corp.
 
DOVER CHEMICAL CORP.
Dover, Ohio
 
 
Dover Chemical Corp. occupies 60 acres on the corner of 15th and Davis Streets in the City of Dover,
Tuscawaras County, Ohio. The site is on the east bank of Sugar Creek, approximately 1 mile above where
it meets the Tuscawaras River. The area is primarily residential. The first facilities were constructed at the
site before World War II. Dover Chemical was incorporated in 1951. In 1974, Ansul Industries acquired the
Dover site, and in 1975 the site was purchased by ICC Industries. Dover Chemical is a subsidiary of ICC
Industries.
 
Since 1949, the company has produced chlorinated organic compounds, including dichlorobenzene,
trichlorobenzene, tetrachlorobisphenol A (TCBA), and dihydroxybenzophenone by-products (later replaced
with chlorinated paraffin by-products). These by-products are used in manufacturing pressure lubricants,
plasticizers, and flame retardants for vinyl products, as well as phosphites (used for temperature, light, and
color stabilization of plastics). Dover Chemical also refined chemicals thought to have been contaminated
with polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs) and polychlorinated bibenzofurans (PCDFs) in the production
area, which covers 9 acres.
 
In the early 1960s, Dover Chemical placed 4,000 gallons of mixed chlorinated benzene by-products in a
low swampy area in the southwest corner of the property and buried 10 drums of chlorinated paraffin by-
products in the east central portion of the property. In 1981, Dover removed 975 tons of waste material
and surrounding contaminated soil to a landfill permitted under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA). Following the 1981 removal action, Dover conducted an environmental
investigation, leading to a draft feasibility study that was submitted to EPA and the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency (OEPA) in April 1986. Both EPA and OEPA rejected the report and requested that
additional data be obtained to complete the remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS). In September
1988, Dover Chemical and EPA entered into an Administrative Order on Consent under CERCLA section
104 to complete the RI/FS. During the RI, Dover Chemical detected PCDDs and PCDFs in soils both
on and off the site. Under an interim action Administrative Order on Consent, issued by EPA in June
1991 under CERCLA Section 106, the company removed these contaminated soils, transported them to
a hazardous waste facility regulated under RCRA Subtitle C, and stabilized the areas. The action was
completed in October 1992.
 
In June 1991, EPA detected organics, including tetrachloroethene, chlorobenzene, dichlorobenzenes, and
trichlorobenzenes, in onsite monitoring wells. Approximately 27,000 people rely on wells within 4 miles of
the site for drinking water; included are 11,000 people serviced by the Dover municipal wells, one of which
is located 1,100 feet from the site, and 16,000 people serviced by the New Philadelphia municipal well field
3.9 miles from the site.
 
Late in 1992, Dover Chemical started pumping the contaminated ground water to the surface and treating it
to remove the contaminants. EPA expects to receive Dover Chemical's draft RI/FS report early in 1993.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
