NPL Site Narrative for Dover Gas Light Co.
 
DOVER GAS LIGHT CO.
Dover, Delaware
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : Dover Gas Light Co. operated a coal gasification plant on
a 0.9-acre site in Dover, Kent County, Delaware from 1859 to 1948. The plant processed coal to produce
a gas that was piped to street lamps in Dover. When the plant closed, the structures, except for a brick
garage, were demolished. Steel and iron scrap were removed; all other materials, including coal oil, coal
tar, coke, and an unknown acid, are believed to have been buried on the site.
 
In 1984, during geotechnical studies of the property prior to construction of the new Kent County Family
Courthouse, remains of this coal gasification plant were discovered buried on-site. The buried materials
include coal tar residues containing hazardous substances.
 
The Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control (DDNREC) installed and
sampled 16 monitoring wells to determine the nature and extent of contamination. The results show that
hazardous substances buried on-site have been released to ground water. These substances include
benzene, toluene, xylene, lead, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbon
compounds, among them naphthalene, fluoranthene, and pyrene.
 
DDNREC determined that these substances are in ground water at depths of up to 53 feet and a horizontal
distance of at least 300 feet southeast of the site. The closest supply well, 1,000 feet southwest of the site,
draws on the Cheswold Aquifer. It is part of Dover's municipal water system. An estimated 45,000 people
are served by public and private wells within 3 miles of the site. Of Dover's 14 municipal supply wells, 7 are
within 1 mile of the site.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA plans to start conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
