 
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** March 2015 
DSC MCLOUTH STEEL  Gibraltar, Michigan  
GIBRALTAR PLANT  Wayne  County  
 
 Site Location: 
The DSC McLouth Steel Gibraltar Plant is located at 28000 West Jefferson Avenue in Gibraltar, Wayne County, Michigan.  
 Site History: 
The site is a former industrial facility that operated as an annealing, pickling and cold roll steel mill. The site includes a leachate treatment lagoon system and three landfills. The leachate control systems have been mismanaged which has resulted in contamination to adjacent creeks and drains that lead to the Detroit River.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Leachate containing high concentrations of phenolic compounds and metals has resulted from rainwater and ground water percolation through steel waste and construction debris.  
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Without long-term cleanup efforts, leachate may run into the Detroit River and contaminate both the river and the Humbug Marsh wildlife refuge.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
In 1999, Detroit Steel Company, Ltd. (DSC) undertook respons e activities at the property required by an administrative order with the EPA. The order requires DSC to stop the exposure of migratory birds to solid wastes at the treatment pond and to protect wildlife and wildlife habitat from any harmful effects of solid waste. DSC has stopped complying with the order. The state has managed the leachate collection since 2008 with limited funds that will soon be exhausted.  
 Need for NPL Listing: 
State and local elected officials have requested the EPA to consider this site for inclusion on the National Priorities List. If left unmanaged leachate from the site could eventually contaminate the Detroit River and Humbug Marsh. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.  See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can  be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.
 
