NPL Site Narrative for Dublin TCE Site
 
DUBLIN TCE SITE
Dublin Borough, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 26, 1989) : The Dublin TCE Site covers approximately 4.5 acres in
Dublin Borough, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
 
In June 1986, the Bucks County Health Department discovered trichloroethylene (TCE) in 23 tap water
samples. The water supplies of approximately 170 homes, apartments, and businesses in Dublin have
been impacted.
 
The highest TCE concentrations (up to 10,000 parts per billion) were found in a well on property that
has been occupied by several industrial operations over the past 50 years. EPA considers this property,
located at 120 Mill Street in Dublin Borough, to be the likely source of the contaminants. According to
EPA's report on its search for parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site, the
companies that operated on-site include Dublin Hosiery Mills, Inc.; Home Window Co. of Pennsylvania,
Inc.; Kollsman Motor Corp.; and Dudley Sports Division of Athlone Industries, Inc.
 
John H. Thompson acquired the property in January 1986 and is using the main building to restore antique
race cars. Laboratory Testing, Inc., has leased part of the property since May 1986.
 
The sole source of drinking water in the area is the Brunswick and Lockatong Formations, which are
hydraulically connected, permitting water to move between them. An estimated 10,100 people obtain
drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
On June 29, 1987, Mr. Thompson entered into a Consent Order with EPA under CERCLA Section 106(a).
Under the order, Mr. Thompson is providing water treatment systems or bottled water to persons with
contaminated wells and is periodically sampling wells in the area. He has also been cooperating with
requests from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER) to study soil and
ground water at the site.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In October 1989, the PA DER approved a plan submitted by Sequa Corp.
(which now owns Kollsman Motor Corp.) to investigate the source of TCE contamination. PA DER is
reviewing results of the investigation.
 
In January 1990, a fire water tower contaminated with TCE leaked. A carbon system is being installed to
treat the contamination.
 
In March 1990, PA DER conditionally approved Sequa's plan to pump contaminated ground water to the
surface, treat it to remove the contamination, and discharge the treated water to the public sewer system.
 
EPA plans to investigate the possibility that parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the
site will conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination
and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
