NPL Site Narrative for DuPage County
Landfill/Blackwell Forest
 
DUPAGE COUNTY LANDFILL/BLACKWELL FOREST
Warrenville, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : DuPage County Landfill covers 40 acres of the 1,235-acre
Blackwell Forest Preserve along the west branch of the DuPage River in Warrenville, DuPage County,
Illinois. During 1965-72, the DuPage County Public Works Department operated the landfill, accepting
demolition debris, municipal refuse, and unknown amounts of potentially hazardous waste.
 
The materials were deposited to a height of 188 feet above the original ground level. When the site was
closed, the Public Works Department covered it with a clay cap that exceeds State standards. It is now
used as a toboggan run in the winter.
 
In 1984, a consultant to the Forest Preserve District of DuPage County detected volatile organic
compounds, including 1,1-dichloroethane, 1,2-dichloropropane, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, and 1,2-
dichloroethane, in numerous monitoring wells installed around the site. Private and public wells within 3
miles of the site provide drinking water to 44,000 people. The Forest Preserve District continues to monitor
the landfill. A lake close to the landfill has been closed to swimming as a precautionary measure.
 
In 1987, the Forest Preserve District began pumping leachate from collection manholes and transporting it
to a regulated disposal facility.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In late 1989, the Forest Preserve District detected the same volatile
chemicals detected in 1984 at greater concentrations downgradient of the site than upgradient.
 
In September 1989, the Forest Preserve District and EPA signed a CERCLA Administrative Order on
Consent calling for the district to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
