NPL Site Narrative for Durham Meadows
 
DURHAM MEADOWS
Durham, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Durham Meadows Site is in the southern Connecticut
town of Durham in Middlesex County. Investigation of the site centers around Merriam Manufacturing
Co., which occupies 5 acres on Main Street in Durham. The company was established in 1851 and
manufactures metal products such as filing equipment, steel security-bank and safe deposit boxes, tool
boxes, and fishing tackle boxes. The manufacturing process generates waste water containing dissolved
organic solvents, including trichloroethylene, methylene chloride, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, and 1,1,2,2-
tetrachloroethylene, as well as paint waste.
 
The company disposed of waste water and sludges on its property in two unlined and undiked lagoons
constructed in 1973. Prior to 1973, waste apparently was disposed of in the septic system, according to
the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (CT DEP). In another area, paint wastes and
degreasing solvents were stored in 55-gallon drums on the ground. Some were in poor condition or leaking
during a CT DEP inspection in 1981. The company stopped using the lagoons in 1982 and removed the
drums in 1983.
 
In 1982, CT DEP detected volatile organic solvents, including trichloroethylene, 1,1,2,2-
tetrachloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, and methylene chloride in private wells in the Durham area.
Such wells are the sole source of drinking water for the 5,600 residents of Durham. CT DEP ordered
Merriam Manufacturing to supply bottled water to residents in the vicinity of the site. Approximately 60
residents have been using bottled water since 1983.
 
On January 4, 1983, following an inspection by EPA and CT DEP, EPA issued an Administrative
Compliance Order and Assessment of Penalties under Section 3008 of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA). The action called for Merriam Manufacturing to correct several violations of State
Hazardous Waste Management Regulations. In response, the company removed drums containing
hazardous waste to a facility regulated under RCRA Subtitle C.
 
The site is less than 0.5 mile from the Coginchaug River, which eventually drains into the Connecticut
River. A fresh water wetland is within 1,500 feet of the site.
 
EPA is searching for other possible sources of contamination.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA emergency staff is sampling the site to determine if a removal action is
warranted at this time.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
