 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gather ed on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the A gency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2011 
DWYER PROPERTY  GROUND  Elkton, Maryland  
WATER PLUME  Cecil County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Dwyer Property Ground Water Plume (Dwyer) site is a ground water plume with unidentified sources.  It is located in a  mixed industrial and residential area in northeastern Maryland.  The property is just north of the Town of Elkton.  
 Site History: 
The Dwyer site is a portion of a former industrial facility, Triumph Explosives, Incorporated, which  primarily manufactured incendiary bombs, shells, land mines, grenades, and flares for the Department of Defense  from the 1930s through the end of World War II.  From 1946 to 1948, Bowers Battery and Spark Plug Company manufactured carbon batteries  at the site.  From 1948 to 1958, Aerial Products, Incorporated, manufactured black powder fireworks at the site.  From 1958 to 1972, Mr. Martin Dwyer produced incendiary flares at the site and used the land to graze cattle.  The site is currently abandoned and heavily overgrown.     
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
There are two known plumes that contain levels of trichloroethene (TCE) above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) for potable water.    
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The ground water in the area of the Dwyer site is heavily used for drinking water.  There are residential and municipal wells located nearby.  Also, there is the potential for  vapor intrusion in those residences that are located adjacent to the property and overlying the plumes.  
 Response Activities (to date): 
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) has completed a remedial investigation of the property under the State Superfund program.     
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of Maryland referred the site to EPA.  Other federal and state programs were considered but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  The local government supports listing.   
