NPL Site Narrative for E.I. Du Pont de
Nemours & Co., Inc. (Newport Pigment
Plant Landfill)
 
E.I. DU PONT DE NEMOURS & CO., INC. (NEWPORT PIGMENT
PLANT LANDFILL)
Newport, Delaware
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : A pigment plant of E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., Inc.,
formerly operated a 7-acre industrial landfill next to the plant, in Newport, New Castle County, Delaware.
The land to the north is primarily residential. The majority of the remaining adjacent property is low-lying
land associated with the Christina River marshes. To the southwest is a sizable expanse of marshland
covered by auto junkyards and rimmed by a residential/commercial strip along Old Airport Road.
 
From 1902 to 1975, the landfill was used for the disposal of inorganically bonded metals, plant pigments,
pigment sludges, magnetic tapes, and low-level radioactive residues, according to information Du Pont
provided to EPA as required by CERCLA Section 103(c).
 
When the landfill closed in 1975, Du Pont graded, covered, and seeded it and installed 11 monitoring wells.
Subsequent sampling by the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control, EPA,
and Du Pont indicated that the shallow Columbia Aquifer and, to a lesser degree, the deeper Potomac
Aquifer have been contaminated, both on and off the site, with heavy metals, including barium, cadmium,
and zinc, as well as trichloroethylene and tetrachloroethylene.
 
The Artesian Water Co., which serves 131,000 people throughout New Castle County, has six wells within
3 miles of the site. Water from the wells is blended in the distribution system. Thus, the water supply for the
131,000 people is potentially threatened. Private wells are also used for drinking water supplies in some
areas, the nearest well being 0.5 mile from the site.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : On August 12, 1988, EPA and Du Pont signed a Consent Order under
CERCLA Section 106 under which the company is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study
(RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action. The RI/FS indicates that contamination extends to a landfill and wetlands south of the Christina
River, as well as to other areas. The RI/FS is scheduled to be completed in 1991.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
