NPL Site Narrative for Eagle Mine
 
EAGLE MINE
Minturn, Redcliff, Colorado
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Eagle Mine and its tailings piles, previously owned by
the New Jersey Zinc Co. and Gulf and Western Industries, cover 110 acres in Eagle County, Colorado,
between the towns of Minturn and Redcliff. About 1,300 people live within 3 miles of the tailings.
 
The company's predecessors began purchasing mines in the area in 1912 and immediately began
production. After a merger in 1938, New Jersey Zinc owned the mine. Zinc mining and milling operations
ceased on December 30, 1977. Silver mining continued intermittently thereafter. The mine is now shut
down completely and owned by Miller Enterprises.
 
Two major tailings piles exist on the site. The old tailings pond was abandoned in 1946 when it reached
capacity. A new tailings pond was constructed about 0.5 mile south where Cross Creek and Eagle River
meet. Approximately 7 million tons of tailings remaining in the disposal areas are owned by Battlemountain
Corp. Several other smaller tailings piles are located on National Forest land nearby, and tailings have
been dumped in areas in the Eagle River floodplain.
 
In the summer of 1984, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to remove transformers containing PCBs
that had been placed in the mine. The transformers were threatened by rising water levels in the mine after
dewatering pumps were turned off.
 
Status (January 1986) : The mine is now filling with water, and acidic metal-laden mine water may
overflow into the river in the near future.
 
Gulf and Western has begun studies to determine concentrations of various metals in surface water
and ground water, as well as to gather data on whether leachate from the tailings can reach the Minturn
drinking water wells.
 
The State has filed a natural resource damage suit under CERCLA against the site owner. As part of the
litigation, the State has collected data on water quality impacts of the various sources and has developed
a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and
identify alternatives for remedial action. The trial is scheduled for April 1986.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : This mining site is being placed on the NPL at this time because it is a noncoal
site with mining operations that occurred after August 3, 1977, the enactment date of the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA). Thus, it is neither regulated by SMCRA nor eligible for funds from
the SMCRA Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation Program.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
