NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
***NPL Site*** January 2018
EAGLE INDUSTRIES  Midwest City, Oklahoma  
Oklahoma County  
Site Location:
The Eagle Industries site encompasses more than two acres in Midwest City, approximately 11 miles east- southeast of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. 
 Site History: 
Eagle Industries inspected and repaired aircraft oxygen and fire extinguisher systems at the site from  1990 through 2010s. A 2003 Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality (ODEQ) inspection of the operating facility revealed improper disposal of trichloroethylene (TCE). The facility appears to be inactive at this time . 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
TCE has been found in soil, sump water and ground water samples  from Eagle Industries on-site monitoring and residential wells. TCE’s daughter products, cis 1,2- dichloroethene (DCE) and vinyl chloride, have been found in soil borings at the site. TCE and DCE have also contaminated the groundwater. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Ground water resources at the site and the surrounding area are threatened by the contamination. TCE has been found in off-site private drinking water wells. The site is an area of recharge for the Central Oklahoma aq uifer system which is a major source of ground water in Central Oklahoma. There are currently no readily available alternative drinking water sources for the 18 family homes south of Eagle Industries. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
In November 2006 a limited soil removal was conducted by a contractor for Eagle Industries under an Administrative Compliance Order (ACO) issued by ODEQ. Approximately 40 cubic yards of contaminated soil were  excavated. Later sampling results confirmed that excavation did not remove all contamination and there were still elevated levels of TCE and DCE. No additional excavation has taken place. In 2015, the EPA connected one residence to the Midwest City public water supply due to contaminant concentrations above health based standards in their drinking water well. Additionally, the owner of a commercial location is providing bottled water to his customers and employees at his own expense. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Oklahoma referred the site to the EPA in September 2016, due to Eagle Industries claim of financial inability to comply with all requirements required under the ACO. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of s upport for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Oklahoma. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS . The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subseque nt FR notices] For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry ( ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
