OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2007 
EAGLE ZINC CO DIV T L DIAMOND Hillsboro, Illinois Montgomery County 
àSite Location: Eagle Zinc Co Div T L Diamond (Eagle Zinc) is located in Hillsboro, Illinois, approximately 50 miles northeast of St. Louis, Missouri. The property encompasses approximately 132 acres, of which approximately 26 acres were heavily used when the smelter was operating. ´Site History: Eagle-Picher Lead Company “Hillsboro Plant” began sme lting operations in 1923, and it produced zinc, sulfuric acid, zinc oxide, and leaded zinc oxide. Eagle-Pitcher continue d operations at the facility until 1980. In 1980, the property was acquired by Sherwin Williams.  Sherwin Williams owned the property between 1980 until 1984.  In 1984, the facility was acquired by Eagle Zinc Company, a division of T. L. Diamond Company of New York City. The facility ceased operations in 2003. During the years of operation, large amounts of slag (a by-product of the smelting process) were produced and placed in waste piles or spread on the ground throughout the facility. The facility is currently vacant. rSite Contamination/Contaminants: A significant amount of the slag within the facility is stored in two waste piles. One waste pile occupies approximately seven acres and rises up to 15 feet above grade and is located  on the southern portion of the facility. The second waste pile occupies approximately 10 acres. It has an average depth of at least one inch and is located on the northwestern half of the facility. Contaminants of concern associated with the slag p iles are metals, primarily cadmium, lead and zinc.  The slag piles are not contained and continue to contaminate su rface water in the area due to runoff from the facility. vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: The northwestern slag pile flows into an unnamed waterway which eventually flows into Lake Hillsboro. Concentrations of several metals including cadmium, lead and zinc were all elevated in sediments of the unnamed creek. Lake Hillsboro is a fishery. Also, the unna med waterway flows through small sections of forested wetlands and supports small wildlife. 3Response Activities (to date): In 1984, Sherwin Williams, under the supervision of Illinoi s EPA, removed approximately 18,000 tons of residue materials from 10 acres of the site. In 2001, the Potentially Responsible Parties entered into an Administrative Order on Consent with U.S. EPA to conduct the Remedial Investig ation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS). The RI/FS is ongoing.  As of August 9, 2000, T. L. Diamond had sold 16,895 tons of fines and reused 4,470 tons of fines.  In addition, T. L. Diamond arranged for the removal from the site of approximately 2,500 tons of waste materials and approximately 3,800 pounds of barium-containing materials from the prior owners’ operations. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
