NPL Site Narrative for Eastern Diversified
Metals
 
EASTERN DIVERSIFIED METALS
Hometown, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Eastern Diversified Metals Site covers about 25 acres in
Hometown, Schuylkill County, Pennsylvania. From 1966 to 1977, the company disposed of an estimated
157 million pounds of "fluff" (plastic waste insulation material) from recycling of copper wire in an open
pile 60 feet high covering an area 500 by 3,000 feet. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources (PA DER) found that the waste pile was producing phenolic leachate. In 1974, as a result of a
Consent Agreement with PA DER, the company installed a waste water treatment plant, diversion ditches,
and an interceptor that diverts shallow ground water to the treatment plant. The surface impoundment
associated with the waste water treatment plant sometimes overflows into a tributary to the Little Schuylkill
River, which is used for trout fishing within 3 miles downstream of the site.
 
Sludge from the waste water treatment plant was disposed of on top of the waste pile until 1983, when PA
DER issued a Notice of Violation to the company. The sludge is now taken to a hazardous waste disposal
facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
The site is underlain by Mauch Chunk, one of the most important water-bearing formations in northeastern
Pennsylvania. About 1,400 people are served by wells that are within 3 miles of the site and draw on the
Mauch Chunk Formation.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : In October 1987, EPA, Theodore Sall, Inc. (present owner of the site),
and AT&T Nassau Metals Corp. (a major source of plastic wire insulation deposited at the site during
1969-1977) signed a CERCLA Consent Order. The order called for a remedial investigation/feasibility
study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action. The RI included analysis of air, surface and subsurface soils, surface water (including
bioassay tests), stream bed sediments, ground water, and the waste pile. No contaminants were found
in air. However, organic and inorganic contaminants were found in soil and water samples. Draft RI/FS
reports are scheduled to be submitted to EPA by the end of 1989.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
