NPL Site Narrative for East Bethel
Demolition Landfill
 
EAST BETHEL DEMOLITION LANDFILL
East Bethel Township, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : The East Bethel Demolition Landfill covers about
60 acres in East Bethel Township in north central Anoka County, Minnesota. The surrounding area is
populated with farms and new single-family homes. Approximately 3,400 people live within 3 miles.
 
In the late 1960s, the landfill operated as a dump. In October 1971, the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency (MPCA) issued a permit to the Sylvester Brothers Development Co. to operate a sanitary landfill
on the site. In recent years, the landfill has accepted only demolition waste. MPCA files indicate that
the equivalent of approximately 4,400 drums of hazardous industrial wastes and contaminated soils
were buried in the landfill in 1974. MPCA is currently updating the landfill's permit. Waste also has been
deposited in wetlands associated with Neds Lake.
 
The landfill is located on the Anoka Sand Plain, a shallow sand aquifer which provides drinking water to a
few residents in the area. The aquifer is contaminated with organic compounds, including chloroform and
1,1,1-trichloroethane, as well as arsenic, according to analyses conducted by a consultant to East Bethel
Demolition Landfill. The majority of residents use a deeper aquifer. A relatively impermeable material is
between these two aquifers, which are approximately 1,000 feet south of the landfill.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
