 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** March 2007 
 
EAST 67th  STREET 
GROUND WATER PLUMEOdessa, Texas  
Ector, County 
 
 
à Site Location: 
 The East 67th   Street Groundwater Plume site consists of a c ontaminated ground water plume originating from an unidentified source(s). The ground water plume is situated in Ector County, adjacent to and northwest of the city limits of Odessa, Texas, and the extent of the plume has not yet been fully identified. The plume is centered in a rural residential area, with some light industry, along East 67th   
 Street and Stevenson Street.  
 
´ Site History: 
 The site was identified by the Texas Commission on Envir onmental Quality (TCEQ) during routine monitoring of public water supplies. Contaminants were first detected above background concentrations at one of the four public supply wells at the DeVilla Mobile Home Park located on VFW Lane. Further testing showed that 31 private drinking water wells within one mile also contain contamination above bac kground concentrations. Eight of those have contaminant concentrations above Safe Drinking Water Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) or health based benchmarks. 
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 The ground water plume contains tetrach loroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE) and cis 1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2- DCE). The site is being evaluated as a ground water plume of  PCE and TCE with no identified source. Eight residential wells with concentrations of PCE above the MCL have been identified. TCEQ is curren tly sampling these wells on a quarterly basis. Sampling by EPA and TCEQ has not yet defined the outer boundary of the plume. However, based on existing sample results, the plume is at least 0.5 mile by 0.5 mile in size.  
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
 There is no other potable water supply for the residents. The potable water is in a relatively shallow aquifer (less than 
70 -100 feet deep).  
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
 TCEQ installed granulated activated charcoal water f iltration systems on eight private wells. Currently TCEQ is providing operation and maintenance on the filtration systems.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
