NPL Site Narrative for Edwards Air Force
Base
 
EDWARDS AIR FORCE BASE
Kern County, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : Edwards Air Force Base (EAFB) is in Kern, Los Angeles, and
San Bernardino Counties, California, occupying approximately 800 square miles in the western portion of
the Mojave Desert. The base has been in operation since 1933. Its primary mission is to conduct research
and development on new aircraft.
 
EAFB is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. Under IRP, the Air Force has identified 21 waste areas at the facility.
 
The Main/South Base area, at the western edge of Rogers Dry Lake, is the primary area for maintenance
and refueling of aircraft. On several occasions, large amounts of fuel have been spilled in the area, and
poor disposal practices have released organic solvents to the ground. Also in the area are an abandoned
sanitary landfill containing pesticides and heavy metals, an area where electroplating wastes were
dumped, and the industrial waste pond, which contains sediments rich in heavy metals.
 
Trichloroethylene, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, 1,2-dichloroethane, tetrachloroethylene, and methylene
chloride are present in ground water underlying the Main/South Base area, according to a 1987 IRP report.
EAFB's 13,800 employees obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the Main/South Base area.
 
There is no perennial surface water at EAFB.
 
The Air Force has completed an initial assessment of the base and is now conducting a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : The Air Force is reviewing previous studies to determine any additional data
needed to fully characterize known waste areas.
 
EPA, the State, and the Air Force are negotiating an Interagency Agreement under CERCLA Section 120
covering response activities at the base.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
