 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary,  including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxF AQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/to xfaq html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2012 
EIGHTEENMILE CREEK  Niagara County , New York  
  
 Site Location: 
The Eighteenmile Creek site is located in Niagara County,  in western NY, on the south side of Lake Ontario. It originates in Lockport, NY from two branches (East and West) immediately north of the New York State Barge Canal (a.k.a. Erie Canal); the creek flows nor th for 15 miles and discharges into Lake Ontario.  
 Site History: 
Eighteenmile Creek has a long history of industrial use dating back to the 19th century. In Lockport, NY, where the creek originates, four industrial or former industrial facilities; i.e., Former Flintkote Plant s ite; Former United Paperboard Company; Upson Park; and Former White Transportation property, have been investigated. This stretch of  the creek is referred to as the Eighteen mile Creek Corridor site. There are numerous industrial facilities and hazardous waste sites located along Eighteenmile Creek. Investigations confirm the presence of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) and other contaminants throughout Eighteenm ile Creek, but specific sources of contamination have not been identified. Possible sources of contamination include: contaminant migration from hazardous waste sites or contaminated properties, industrial/municipal wastewater discharges, storm water and combined sewer outfall discharges. The Burt and Newfane Dams (along the creek) may cause contaminated sediments to accumulate.   
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Sampling events indicate that Eighteenmile Creek sediments are contaminated with a variety of pollutan ts, including mercury, lead, copper, pesticides/insecticides; PCBs, dioxins, and furans. PCBs are the primary contaminants in sediment samples collected from Eighteen mile Creek. Although the highest PCB concentrations have been reported within the Corridor site, sampling data indicate that contamination extends about 13 miles downstream to Burt Dam.  
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Eighteenmile Creek is surrounded by six residential townships. The land within the Eighteenm ile Creek watershed consists primarily of croplands and orchards, with residential, commercial and industrial areas located around Lockport, Newfane, and Olcott Harbor. S everal wetlands are adjacent to contaminated portions of the creek and there is evidence of fishing in the Corridor site and other portions of the creek. Fisherman’s Park, a public fishing area located within the creek, is a major fishing area (22,000 angler hours recorded in 2005) . The reach of the creek between Burt Dam and Lake Ontario  is classified an Area of Concern by the Great Lakes National Program Office , due to its natural resources value within the Lake Ontario watershed.  
 Response Activities (to date): 
Eighteenmile Creek and surrounding properties have been the focus of numerous investigations by the NY State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and the EPA since the late 1980s. The most recent study focused on collecting sediment samples from Eighteen mile Creek beginning just downstream of the Corridor s ite for almost the entire length of the creek, but samples w ere not collected between Burt Dam and Lake Ontario.   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at t his time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the S tate of New York. 
