 
  
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** September 2016 
ELDORADO CHEMICAL CO ., INC.  Live Oak , Texas   
 Bexar  County  
 
 Site Location: 
The site is located northwest of the city of San Antonio in the suburb of Live Oak, Bexar County, Texas.  
 Site History: 
The Eldorado Chemical Co., Inc. was a former manufacturer of cleaning products from 1978 through 2007.  The site consists of a ground water plume of chlorinated solvents originating from historical releases of chemicals used in the facility’s manufacturing operations.   
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Soil and ground water are contaminated with chlorinated solvents including, tetrachloroethene, trichloroethene, dichloroethene and vinyl chloride. These contaminants were found within the alluvial ground water with the potential to release into the underlying Edwards Aquifer. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
An estimated 215,722 residents in the city of Live Oak, city of Universal City, city of Selma, city of Converse, Randolph Air Force Base, and city of San Antonio use ground water for their  drinking water supply. This population may potentially be exposed to the contaminants that result ed from historical manufacturing operations.  
 Response Activities (to date): 
No federal response actions have been taken. The property owner  conducted limited cleanup activities between 1984 and 1986, including the removal of soil at  visibly contaminated areas.  
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality ( TCEQ) referred the site to the EPA due to the chlorinated solvent plume, use of ground water for drinking , and the presence of geologic conditions favorable for migration of contaminants. Without identification and investigation of the source of ground water contamination and remediation of the contaminated ground water plume , public and private wells may be contaminated. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing thi s site on the NPL from the state of Texas. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
 
