NPL Site Narrative for Electro-Coatings,
Inc.
 
ELECTRO-COATINGS, INC.
Cedar Rapids, Iowa
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Electro-Coatings, Inc., has conducted chromium-plating
operations on a 1-acre site in Cedar Rapids, Linn County, Iowa, since 1947. The site is at the north edge
of Cedar Lake and on the east edge of Cedar River. In 1976, an unknown amount of chromic acid leaked
from a deteriorated waste water pit. The State investigated, and in June 1977 issued an executive order
requiring the company to install new monitoring wells to define the extent of the plume of contamination.
Electro-Coatings installed two wells in 1978 and two more in 1983. The company took some cleanup
actions. However, in 1982, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources found high levels of hexavalent
chromium (up to 11 milligrams per liter) in a well of Hawkeye Rubber Co., a neighboring company. Since
1983, the State has required five additional monitoring wells to be installed to help determine the extent of
contamination.
 
Cedar Rapids municipal wells serving nearly 10,000 people are within 3 miles of the site.
 
The facility is being proposed for the NPL because it is classified as a protective filer under Subtitle C
of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and so is not subject to Subtitle C corrective action
authorities.
 
Status (December 1988) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : The State is investigating the possibility that Electro-Coatings, Inc., will conduct
the RI/FS with State and EPA oversight.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
