NPL Site Narrative for Elizabethtown
Landfill
 
ELIZABETHTOWN LANDFILL
Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Elizabethtown Landfill occupies 15 acres on West Ridge
Road in West Donegal Township, Lancaster County, approximately 1 mile southwest of Elizabethtown,
Pennsylvania. The area is largely agricultural and rural residential. The site is an unlined sandstone quarry
that operated as an unpermitted landfill from about 1958 to 1973, accepting an unknown quantity of
industrial and municipal wastes from surrounding communities.
 
Originally, the site operated as a sanitary landfill under several owners. In the late 1960s, Macke Vending
Co. purchased the site, operating it until the early 1970s, when it was purchased by SCA Services, Inc. A
Consent Decree filed by Pennsylvania ordered operations at the landfill to cease by July 31, 1973.
 
In 1985, EPA detected chlorobenzene, benzene, 1,1-dichloroethane, and manganese in off-site
downgradient monitoring wells, as well as in leachate on the site. The leachate also contained lead. An
estimated 13,200 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site. A
private well is 800 feet from the site.
 
EPA also observed leachate seeping into Conoy Creek, which is 800 feet downslope of the site. The creek
is used for recreational activities.
 
Waste Management, Inc. (WMI) acquired the site when it acquired SCA Services in October 1984. In
1986, WMI covered the site with 2 feet of clay and 6 inches of topsoil, installed vents to control migration
of methane, installed a system to collect leachate, constructed a sedimentation basin, and installed a
drainage system to channel run-off to the basin.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is conducting a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site and will then negotiate with them to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
