NPL Site Narrative for Ellenville Scrap Iron
and Metal
 
ELLENVILLE SCRAP IRON AND METAL
Ellenville, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 13, 2001) : The Ellenville Scrap Iron and Metal facility is a 24-
acre, inactive scrap iron and metal reclamation facility located at 34 Cape Road in the rural Village of
Ellenville, Ulster County, New York. Approximately 10 acres of the facility were used for the scrap metal
operations. The facility is bound to the north by Cape Road; to the south and west by Beer Kill; and to the
east by residential homes, one of which was formerly part of the property, used for the storage of heavy
equipment and automobile batteries. The facility consists of an office building, truck scale, hydraulic baling
machine used for metal cans and other small parts, scrap metal piles, a landfill embankment composed of
construction and demolition debris, and automobile battery and brush piles. Deteriorated drums are found
scattered throughout the property, the majority of which are found on the lower portion adjacent to Beer
Kill. The landfill embankment, approximately 40 feet in height, runs in a crescent along a northwesterly to
southeasterly axis bisecting and dividing the site into upper and lower portions.
 
The Ellenville facility, in operation since 1950, was used for the recycling of automobile batteries. The
facility was purchased in late 1997 and used as a landfill and tire dump. A New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) permit was never obtained to operate a solid waste management
facility or to store tires at the site. From 1987 to 1998 NYSDEC inspected the Ellenville facility on
numerous occasions and directed the owners to remediate conditions at the site. In March 1987, Ellenville
Scrap proposed a Settlement of Claim with NYSDEC, which was accepted on January 15, 1988. As part of
that Settlement of Claim, Ellenville Scrap acknowledged that it was operating a solid waste management
facility without a NYSDEC permit and that it had improperly disposed of industrial waste. In connection
with this settlement, Ellenville Scrap agreed to close and cover the area where construction and demolition
debris had been disposed. Subsequent Consent Orders entered into by Ellenville Scrap and C. Bruno
Demolition with the NYSDEC called for an evaluation of site conditions and the removal of all construction
and demolition debris at the facility that did not meet exemption criteria of state environmental law. As of
June 2000, construction and demolition debris had not been removed from the site.
 
Two sources have been identified for the Hazard Ranking System (HRS) evaluation of the site:
contaminated soil in the facility disposal area, and the landfill embankment. There are other areas of
environmental concern, such as piles of scrap metal, miscellaneous waste, waste tires, railroad ties, and
automobile batteries, as well as leachate that has been observed discharging from the embankment,
ponding at its base, and flowing to and disappearing beneath a pile of brush.
 
There is an observed release of bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate to a surface water/sediment sampling location
in Beer Kill. Beer Kill is a fishery and is designated for recreational use. Seven residential properties are
located in a neighborhood adjacent to the site. There is documented contamination above regulatory levels
at two of these residences with polychorinated biphenyls (PCBs); one of these residences was formerly
part of the facility and was used for the storage of heavy equipment and automobile batteries.
 
Status (September 2002) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
