NPL Site Narrative for Ellsworth Air Force
Base
 
ELLSWORTH AIR FORCE BASE
Rapid City, South Dakota
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 26, 1989) : Ellsworth Air Force Base covers 4,858 acres in Meade and
Pennington Counties, South Dakota, approximately 6 miles northeast of Rapid City and 1.4 miles north
of Box Elder. The base is bordered by open land on three sides, and residential/commercial areas on the
fourth.
 
Established in 1942, Ellsworth is now the base for the 44th Strategic Missile Wing of the Strategic
Air Command (SAC). Base operations generally support the SAC mission and include runways,
airfield operations, fire protection training, industrial and maintenance shops, a base hospital, grounds
maintenance, a photo lab, and housing facilities. These operations generate a variety of chlorinated
solvents, solvent-contaminated waste oils, pesticides, and other hazardous wastes that were deposited at
various locations on the base.
 
Ellsworth Air Force Base is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978.
Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. IRP has identified 17 potentially contaminated areas--13 on-base, 4 off-base.
EPA evaluated four of these areas--three unlined landfills and the Fire Protection Training Area burn pit.
 
On-site shallow monitoring wells downgradient from the landfills and burn pit are contaminated with
1,1-dichloroethane, 1,2-dichloroethylene, trichloroethylene, arsenic, and chromium, according to tests
conducted in 1987-88 by the Army Corps of Engineers. An estimated 1,600 people obtain drinking water
from wells within 3 miles of the base, the nearest less than 1 mile downgradient of the burn pit and two of
the landfills.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : Ellsworth has completed portions of a remedial investigation (RI) to determine
the type and extent of contamination and is now working on a feasibility study (FS) to identify alternatives
for remedial action. The FS focuses on 4 of the 17 areas originally identified. EPA is reviewing various
documents from both the RI and FS.
 
EPA will shortly begin negotiations with Ellsworth for an Interagency Agreement under CERCLA Section
120 covering future activities at the base.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
