 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
ATIONAL RIORITIES IST 
N P L (NPL) 
***Final Site*** March 2007 
 
ELM STREET GROUND WATER CONTAMINATION Terre Haute, Indiana  
Vigo County 
 
à Site Location: 
The Elm Street Ground Water Contamination site consists of two properties threatening the Terre Haute municipal water supply system. It is located in west central Terre Haute, west central Indiana, in Vigo County.  The approximate size of the area of known ground water contamination is 600 feet long by 160 feet wide. 
 
´ Site History: 
I Gurman and Sons was a drum recycler, located 600 feet eas t of the Terre Haute municipal water supply system.  The standard practice for most of its operational history from  the 1940s to the 1970s was to open the drum and dump the contents onto the ground surface and then rinse the remaini ng contents down the sewer in the process area prior to refurbishing.  Site contaminants have been detected in the surface and subsurface soils and in the shallow ground water monitoring wells beneath I Gurman and Sons.  In 1998, this company received conditional small quantity generator status under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). 
Bi-State Products is located 100 feet east of the Terre Haut e municipal water supply system.  It operated from the mid- 1930s through approximately 1980.  The site was purchased in  1980, by the owners of Machine Tool Service, located directly south of Bi-State.  Bi-State Products stored petroleu m products and solvents for parts cleaning prior to distribution to local service stations.  It was also a satellite collection a nd storage site for a petroleum recycler.  Waste oils were stor ed in large above ground tanks.  The site had the storage capac ity for approximately 150,000 gallons of spent oil product.  This facility was closed in 1980.  Site contaminants have b een detected in the surface and subsurface soils and in the shallow ground water monitoring wells beneath Bi-State Products. 
  
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The site contaminants are tetrachloroethene (PCE) and trichloroethene (TCE).   
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
The ground water contamination threatens the Terre Haute municipal water supply system.  The Terre Haute municipal water supply system serves approximately 80,000 people.  Curren tly, the levels of contaminants in the distribution water are not above regulatory levels.  The presence of TCE and PC E in the raw well water has the potential to impact this municipal supply during high use, alternate pumping, maintenance, or emergency periods. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
The municipal water supplier is currently blending the water to ensure that the distribution water is not above regulatory limits. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
