NPL Site Narrative for Endicott Village
Well Field
 
ENDICOTT VILLAGE WELL FIELD
Village of Endicott, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Endicott Village Well Field is in the Village of Endicott,
Town of Union, Broome County, New York. The village operates four wells which provide water for
approximately 45,000 people. The Ranney Well, which supplies approximately 47 percent of the total
capacity of the system, has operated continuously since 1950. It is located on the north bank of the
Susquehanna River between En-Joie Golf Course and Grippen Park in the Village of Endicott.
 
In May 1981, EPA detected vinyl chloride and other organic chemicals in the Ranney Well. In February
1982, EPA confirmed vinyl chloride in the well. Samples taken by the State in 1982 and 1983 also showed
the presence of 1,1-dichloroethane, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, and trichloroethylene in the Ranney Well
and other points in the distribution system. The village has installed aeration equipment to remove vinyl
chloride from the water and is presently sampling the Ranney Well and various distribution points in the
system on a weekly basis. Low levels of vinyl chloride (1 to 3 parts per billion) are still being detected in the
well water.
 
The State has undertaken a comprehensive investigation of the contamination of the Endicott Village
Well Field. It has installed 10 monitoring wells on the En-Joie Golf Course and sampled some existing
upgradient wells. Preliminary sampling has revealed that a portion of the well field is more heavily
contaminated than was indicated in the Ranney Well samples. A number of potential vinyl chloride sources
are being investigated. So far, no source has been conclusively identified.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
