NPL Site Narrative for Enterprise Avenue
 
ENTERPRISE AVENUE
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (December 30, 1982) : The Enterprise Avenue Site covers about 57 acres
along the Delaware River in an industrial area of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. From 1971 to mid-1976,
the city operated the site as a landfill. Several waste-handling firms buried at least 10,000 drums of
hazardous wastes there without the city's permission. During exploratory excavations in January 1979,
the Philadelphia Water Department discovered approximately 1,700 drums that contained or had once
contained wastes such as paint sludges, solvents, oils, resins, metal-finishing waste, and solid inorganic
wastes. In 1982, the city started cleanup actions, including removal of drums and soil to a landfill permitted
under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). A total of 32,800 cubic yards of excavated
soil was identified as contaminated with organic chemicals (toluene, benzene, ethylbenzene, or organic
halogenated compounds). In October 1982, after spending $7 million cleaning up the site, the city ran out
of money. Left on-site were approximately 20,000 tons of contaminated soil in two piles that had been
partially covered.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : EPA and the State are considering various alternatives for the site.
 
Status (March 7, 1986) : In 1984, EPA and the city started to complete the remedial actions. All of the
stockpiled soils were analyzed for a variety of metals and organic chemicals. Soils were divided into 100-
cubic-yard lots. A Key Indicator Analysis was used to determine which lots would be disposed of in an
off-site facility. If any one indicator exceeded action levels, the entire soil lot was deemed contaminated
and sent off-site. Action levels for inorganics were selected based upon the Extraction Procedure Toxicity
Test used to determine if a waste is hazardous under RCRA. Organic action levels were established
using similar methodology and are consistent with levels that would be used today. After removal of
contaminated soils from the site, the area was sampled on a grid pattern to ensure that all soils not passing
the test had been transported off-site. The results indicated that the remedial objectives were attained, and
that all soils considered contaminated were removed. The site was then capped, seeded, and fenced.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under CERCLA has
been implemented, and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate. The Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources has agreed to operate and maintain the site. The department has
also developed and implemented an operation and maintenance plan for the cap and will monitor ground
water to ensure that water quality remains at background levels.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
