NPL Site Narrative for Envirochem Corp.
 
ENVIROCHEM CORP.
Zionsville, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : Envirochem Corp. owned and operated a waste storage and
recycling business on 6 acres in Boone County, Zionsville, Indiana. The site is adjacent to the Northside
Landfill. The facility recovered solvents and oils from industrial sources from 1977 until May 1982, when it
was closed under a Court Order obtained by the State. The company's on-site storage practices resulted
in an inventory beyond that needed to maintain recycling operations. Thus, when the company went
into receivership, over 20,000 drums and 400,000 gallons of waste remained on-site. On one occasion,
this excessive inventory resulted in an overflow of contaminated rainwater from a holding pond into an
unnamed ditch that flows to Findley Creek, causing an oil sheen on Findley and Eagle Creeks. Some
drums stored in the open and without an impermeable base deteriorated. In 1981, three organic solvents
(1,1-dichloroethane, trichloroethene, and 1,1,1-trichloroethane) were found in on-site wells.
 
Status (July 1983) : In February 1983, EPA signed a $310,200 Superfund State Contract with Indiana.
Under the contract, EPA completed a limited feasibility study that recommends off-site disposal of all
drum and tank wastes and on-site treatment with off-site disposal of contaminated rainwater. In addition,
due to the deteriorating conditions at the site, EPA has taken emergency measures to stabilize the site.
Concurrently, EPA is conducting a remedial investigation and feasibility study to determine the cost-
effective remedy for dealing with contaminated soils and ground water.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
