 
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Proposed Site*** March 2015 
ESTECH GENERAL  Calumet City , Illinois   
CHEMICAL COMPANY  Cook County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Estech site is a 54-acre inactive facility located in a heavily industrialized area at 150 Marble Street, Calumet City, Illinois.    
 Site History: 
Estech manufactured pesticides and fertilizers at the site from approximately 1952 to 1969. From the late 1980s until 1996, the site was an open dump for auto fluff waste. The property is currently abandoned.    
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Elevated levels of a range of contaminants have been found in site soils, sediment and ground water. The principal contaminants are polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), pesticides, metals, and semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs). Auto fluff waste containing PCBs, pesticides, SVOCs and metals  is present at the site, up to 20 feet in depth. Elevated levels of these same contaminants can also be found at the former lagoon system area which covered approximately 7.5 acres of the site. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
An on-site wetland is contaminated. The Grand Calumet River borders the southern boundary of the site. There are fish consumption advisories in the Calumet River system due to the presence of PCBs.    
 Response Activities (to date): 
In 1999, the EPA placed a six to twelve inch  soil barrier over approximately 27 acres of auto fluff.    
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Illinois referred the site to the EPA. There are no other programs available to effectively undertake a comprehensive site investigation or clean-up. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site to the NPL from the state of Illinois. Calumet City also expressed support for NPL Listing to the state of Illinois.     
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.  See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.
 
