NPL Site Narrative for Fairchild
Semiconductor Corp. (South San Jose
Plant)
 
FAIRCHILD SEMICONDUCTOR CORP. (SOUTH SAN JOSE PLANT)
South San Jose, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Fairchild Semiconductor Corp. manufactures
semiconductors on approximately 20 acres in South San Jose, Santa Clara County, California. Land use in
the vicinity of the site is agricultural, residential, and commercial.
 
This site was proposed under the name "Fairchild Camera & Instrument Corp. (South San Jose Plant)."
The company took the new name in 1986.
 
Soils and part of a major aquifer providing drinking water to an estimated 65,000 people are contaminated
with trichloroethane and other solvents, according to analyses conducted by the Great Oaks Water Co. and
Fairchild. One municipal well within 3 miles of the site has been taken out of service.
 
In response to a request from the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Fairchild is voluntarily
taking action to contain and reduce the plume of contamination. Fairchild has started an investigation to
determine the extent of the problem at the site and is currently undertaking interim cleanup measures
consisting of excavation of contaminated soils, the pumping and treatment of contaminated ground water,
and construction of a slurry wall to reduce the spread of contamination from the site.
 
The plant received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the company filed Part A of a permit application.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
Status (January 1986) : Fairchild has removed contaminated soil from the facility, has installed a system to
pump and treat contaminated ground water, and is constructing the slurry wall.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : EPA is proposing to place this previously proposed RCRA site on the final NPL. In
1982, the facility converted to a hazardous waste generator. Hence, it satisfies a component of EPA's NPL/
RCRA policy.
 
The slurry wall has been completed. In a pilot test, vapor extraction proved to effectively clean
up contaminated soil within the wall. A full-scale system is scheduled to be implemented shortly.
Contaminated ground water continues to be pumped and treated.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has placed this site on the NPL.
 
A Record of Decision was signed in March 1989, finalizing the remedy and concurring with State orders
for final cleanup. The company is in compliance with these orders. The remedy includes pumping and
treatment of ground water and vapor extraction to remove contaminants from soils. In addition, the
feasibility of reinjecting treated ground water is being studied.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
