NPL Site Narrative for Fairchild
Semiconductor Corp. (Mountain View
Plant)
 
FAIRCHILD SEMICONDUCTOR CORP. (MOUNTAIN VIEW PLANT)
Mountain View, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Fairchild Semiconductor Corp. manufactures
semiconductors in Mountain View, Santa Clara County, California. The facility occupies approximately 56
acres and is surrounded by residential and industrial areas.
 
This site was originally proposed under the name "Fairchild Camera & Instrument Corp. (Mountain View
Plant)." The company took the new name in 1986.
 
Monitoring wells on the site are contaminated with trichloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, 1,1- and
trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, according to analyses conducted by a consultant to Fairchild. Contamination is
believed to have resulted from leaking underground tanks. About 270,000 people depend on wells within 3
miles of the site for drinking water.
 
Since early 1982, Fairchild has been investigating the site geology and hydrogeology and attempting
to define the lateral and vertical extent of solvents underlying the site. Fairchild has installed two wells
to pump and treat the contaminated ground water plume. The company is working with the California
Regional Water Quality Control Board to further define the extent of contamination and outline various
cleanup strategies.
 
The plant received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the company filed Part A of a permit application.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
Status (February 1986) : Continuing to determine the extent of ground water contamination, Fairchild has
installed more than 100 monitoring wells.
 
On August 15, 1985, EPA issued an Administrative Order on Consent under CERCLA Section 106(a) to
Fairchild's Mountain View Plant, as well as to Intel Corp.'s and Raytheon Corp.'s Mountain View Plants.
The order calls for the companies to conduct a joint remedial investigation/feasibility study of the area to
determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (June 1988) : EPA is proposing to drop Fairchild Semiconductor Corp.'s Mountain View Plant from
the proposed NPL. Because the site is a treatment and storage facility, it is subject to the corrective action
authorities of Subtitle C RCRA.
 
Fairchild now has 25 wells in operation that pump and treat contaminated ground water; has installed
three underground slurry walls to control migration of contaminated ground water. EPA has sealed two
abandoned agricultural wells that were carrying contamination to the deeper aquifers.
 
EPA may also pursue cleanup under RCRA authorities and will ensure that the cleanup protects public
health and the environment. EPA can later repropose the site for the NPL if it determines that the owner or
operator is unable or unwilling to clean up the site effectively.
 
Status (February 11, 1991) : EPA is adding this site to the NPL because, although it is subject to RCRA
Subtitle C, the transfer of primary responsibility from CERCLA to RCRA would delay and complicate the
overall cleanup of the site.
 
The RI was concluded in July 1988. A draft FS and EPA's Proposed Plan were presented to the community
for a 60-day public comment period in November 1988. EPA signed the Record of Decision (ROD)
identifying the selected remedy on June 9, 1989. On September 21, 1990, EPA issued an Explanation of
Significant Differences clarifying the ROD.
 
In May 1989, EPA sent Special Notice Letters calling for a remedial design/remedial action (RD/RA)
Consent Decree to Fairchild and 16 other parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the
site. Fairchild failed to conclude a settlement (Consent Decree) with EPA. On November 29, 1990, EPA
issued Fairchild and eight other parties a Unilateral Administrative Order for RD/RA.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
