NPL Site Narrative for Fairchild Air Force
Base (4 Waste Areas)
 
FAIRCHILD AIR FORCE BASE (4 WASTE AREAS)
Spokane County, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Fairchild Air Force Base (AFB) occupies approximately 4,300
acres 12 miles west of Spokane, Spokane County, Washington. The base opened in 1942 as the Spokane
Army Air Depot. In 1950, the name was changed to Fairchild AFB. Its primary mission is to maintain and
repair aircraft, primarily large craft such as bombers and tankers.
 
Four waste areas covering 85 acres comprise the NPL site: Building 1034 French drain and dry well
system; two landfills, one northeast of Taxiway 8 and one at Craig Road; and the industrial waste lagoons.
During past base activities, more than 4,000 drum equivalents of carbon tetrachloride and other solvents,
paint wastes, plating sludges containing cadmium and lead, and related industrial wastes were disposed of
in the four areas.
 
A 10- to 20-foot layer of permeable sand and gravel overlies an aquifer under the base. The aquifer, which
consists of Columbia River Flood Basalt, is highly fractured. These conditions facilitate movement of
contaminants into ground water, as well as movement of contaminated ground water. A well within base
boundaries serves as a standby water supply for the base's 5,200 employees. In addition, approximately
400 private wells serving about 20,000 people are within 3 miles of the facility.
 
West Medical Lake, Medical Lake, and Silver Lake are within 3 miles downstream of Fairchild AFB. These
lakes support wildlife and are used for recreational activities.
 
Fairchild AFB is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The Air Force has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary survey)
is underway. Additional ground water monitoring is planned for 1988.
 
Fairchild AFB received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) by filing Part A of a permit application for the industrial waste lagoons. EPA and the State are
reviewing Part B of the permit. Discharges from the lagoons and the sanitary waste water treatment plant
are regulated under permits issued under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
 
Status (March 13, 1989) : Ground water sampling conducted by Fairchild AFB in 1986 and 1987 detected
numerous volatile, semivolatile, and inorganic compounds at significantly elevated levels. Contamination
has been detected at the four waste areas described above as well as other areas at the base. Fairchild
AFB is working with EPA to develop a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
