NPL Site Narrative for Federal Creosote
 
FEDERAL CREOSOTE
Manville, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 28, 1998) : The areas of contamination at Federal Creosote are located on
over 35 acres of land in Manville Borough, Somerset County, New Jersey. From an unknown date until
1957, the site property was used as a railroad tie creosoting facility. Two lagoons were used by the facility,
one on Valerie Drive and one on E. Camplain Road. The property is currently the location of a 137-property
residential community known as the Claremont development.
 
On April 19, 1996, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) was notified of the
discharge of an unknown liquid with a strong chemical odor from a sump located at a residence within the
Claremont development. A representative from the NJDEP responded to the property on April 22 and 25,
1996, and inspected the sump. The inspection report indicated the presence of a "thick dark brown tar oil
like substance" flowing from the sump outflow pipe into a gutter. Analysis of a sample of this substance
indicated that it was petroleum based and was ignitable and soluble in alcohol.
 
In January 1997, Manville Borough responded to a complaint that a sinkhole had developed around a
sewer pipe located in the Claremont development. During excavation of the area surrounding the sewer
pipe, a black tar-like substance was found in the soil. Investigation of the substance indicated that it
contained contaminants consistent with the composition of creosote.
 
Two soil sampling events (October 1997 and February 1998) were subsequently conducted at the site by
a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency contractor. During these sampling events, surface soil samples
(< 2 feet in depth) were collected from numerous residential properties within the Claremont Development.
Analysis of these soil samples has indicated the presence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons at levels
significantly above the levels detected in the background samples. A total of 32 Level I contaminated
residences, and 5 Level II contaminated residences have been identified. There is a potential for
groundwater contamination at the site. The Manville Borough public supply wells are located one-quarter
mile northwest of the site. These wells serve as a partial source of municipal water for the Manville area.
 
Status (January 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
