NPL Site Narrative for Fields Brook
 
FIELDS BROOK
Ashtabula, Ohio
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : Fields Brook is located in Ashtabula in the northeastern corner
of Ohio. It meanders for approximately 4 miles, first though a diversified chemical industrial complex and
then through a residential area in Ashtabula, before emptying into the Ashtabula River. The site consists
of the brook plus the 14 industries bordering it. Both point and non-point sources adjacent to Fields Brook
have contaminated its sediments with a variety of toxic chemicals, including PCBs and other chlorinated
organics, mercury, chromium, and arsenic. The contaminated sediments threaten drinking water intakes of
Lake Erie. Analyses of fish flesh indicate the bioaccumulation of chlorinated organics, posing a secondary
threat to people who consume contaminated fish.
 
Status (July 1983) : In September 1982, EPA approved $450,000 for a remedial investigation to identify
the existing and potential sources of contamination, as well as routes of contamination, and a feasibility
study to identify alternatives for remedial action at the site. For the remedial investigation/feasibility study,
the site also includes the Ashtabula River and harbor, since contamination in those sediments can be
linked to the brook. However, any remedial action will be limited to the brook and surrounding industrial
sites, since the Ashtabula River and harbor are maintained by the Corps of Engineers for navigation
purposes. The work is scheduled to be completed in the fourth quarter of 1984.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
