OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2007 
FIVE POINTS PCE PLUME Woods Cross/Bountiful, Utah Davis County 
àSite Location: The site is located within the Salt Lake Valley in the Cities of Woods Cross and Bountiful, Utah. A ground water plume begins in Bountiful, traveling west-north west into Woods Cross City, contaminati ng the city’s municipal well system. Most of the mile-long plume underlies Woods Cross City, making it the affected community. ´Site History: The site consists of a ground water plum e of tetrachloroethylene (also called “PCE” or “PERC”).  Woods Cross City has only four municipal water wells to provide drinking water to the community of 7,400 people. Two of these wells are contaminated with PCE. One of the wells is consistently above the Cancer Risk Screening Concentration (CRSC) and the federally regulated Maximun Contaminant Level (MCL). This well is no longer used, but when it was in use, this well provided up to 50% of the city's water supply.  The other aff ected well has levels of PCE below the MCL and is within Federal Drinking Water Standards. Nearby monitoring wells show higher amounts of contamination than the drinking water wells. The movement of ground water indicates that the c ontamination is likely to increase in the municipal wells over time. The contamination is thought to be from one or mo re dry cleaning operations in the area.  Woods Cross City cannot address the contamination because of the cost and technical complexity of the problem. Both Cities, the State, and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have  been working to address this ongoing problem. rSite Contamination/Contaminants: Sampling and analyses indicate the plume has multiple poten tial sources, but has no clear identifiable source(s). The plume consists of PCE, which indicates dry cleaning operations  as a likely source. Two former dry cleaners and one active dry cleaner are in near proximity to each other and the plume. vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: The municipal drinking water system of Woods Cross City has been impaired by this increasing contamination. More than 7,400 residents are served by the drinking water system.  3Response Activities (to date): EPA’s Removal Program has been working with one of the nearby dry cleaners to remove old underground storage structures that used to contain PCE.  This action will only partially address the source(s) and will not address the contaminated water.  The City, State, and EPA are committed to working cooperatively to address all of the environmental concerns at this site. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
