 
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
    
  
    
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2008 
FLASH CLEANERS Pompano Beach, Florida Broward County 
àSite Location: Flash Cleaners is located at 4131 North Federal Highway, Pompano Beach, Broward County, Florida. ´Site History: Flash Cleaners operated as a dry cleaning facility from 1977 to approximately 2001.  Dry cleaning operations have since been discontinued at the site. The facility is currently being used as a drop-off location for outsourced dry cleaning services. During a 1999 Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) inspection, FDEP noted the presence of two dry cleaning machines at the facility.  The non-operational machine and waste containers were located on a bare concrete floor with no secondary cont ainment.  Wastewater from dry cleaning activities were reportedly discharged to an onsite septic tank, which resulted in soil and ground water contamination. rSite Contamination/Contaminants: Analytical results of surface and subsurface soil samples collected throughout the property and a sludge sample collected from the onsite septic tank contained site-related hazardous substances, including cis-1,2-dichloroethene (DCE), trans-1,2-DCE, tetrachloroethene (PCE), and trichloroethene (TCE).  Concentrations of PCE and TCE detected in the septic tank sludge sample were above federal regulatory limits.  Site-related hazardous substances detected in onsite soil and the septic tank sludge were detected above background concentrations in onsite monitoring wells. Also, cis-1,2-DCE, PCE, TCE, and vinyl chloride we re detected in the ground water samples above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant levels (MCLs). vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: About 220,378 people within a four mile radius of Flash Cleaners are provided drinking water from one of four municipal systems: the City of Deerfield Beach, the Town of Hillsboro, Broward County District 2A, and the City of Pompano Beach.  These water departments obtain drinking water from municipal wells that withdraw water from the sole-source Biscayne Aquifer. The nearest municipal well is located about 0.8 mile northwest of Flash Cleaners.  Nearby canals and the Hillsboro River might also be contaminated from ground water contamination emanating from Flash Cleaners. These surface water bodies are habitats fo r federally designated endangered and threatened species.  3Response Activities (to date): In 2001, septic tank sludge was pumped out and disposed of as hazardous waste.  EPA and the state have conducted a preliminary assessment, site inspection, and expanded site inspection at the site. }Need for NPL Listing: The State of Florida referred the site to EPA after they determined that the site was not eligible for the state dry-cleaner remediation program.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.   
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
