NPL Site Narrative for Fletcher's Paint
Works & Storage
 
FLETCHER'S PAINT WORKS & STORAGE
Milford, New Hampshire
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Fletcher's Paint Works has operated a plant since 1950 on
an area of approximately 0.15 acre at 21 Elm Street in Milford, Hillsborough County, New Hampshire.
The area is primarily residential/commercial. Fletcher's Paint manufactures and sells paints and stains for
residential use. Approximately 700 feet to the south (on Mill Street) is a warehouse for storing bulk paint
pigments. Contaminants attributable to the storage facility have been detected in a drainage ditch on the
adjoining Hampshire Paper Co. facility. Because this ditch drains from the storage facility, the boundaries
of the Fletcher's site include the portion of the ditch on Hampshire Paper property.
 
In an inspection in July 1985, EPA detected volatile organic compounds (VOCs), heavy metals, and PCBs
in soil, surface water, and sediment at the site. VOCs were detected in ambient air. Two underground
tanks were not lined. Several hundred drums were stored behind the operating plant.
 
The site is adjacent to and upslope from the Souhegan River, which is used for recreational activities.
Contaminants, including benzene, toluene, nickel, lead, and tetrachloroethylene, attributable to the facility
have been detected in river sediments. The manufacturing facility is easily accessible and is adjacent to
a road leading to a popular recreation area. PCBs, organic solvents, barium, lead, and nickel have been
found in on-site soil.
 
The potential threat to ground water is high due to the highly permeable nature of the shallow sand and
gravel aquifer (12 feet in some places) that supplies drinking water to area residents. An estimated 11,400
people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : Using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA removed 864 drums of paint resins
and drying agents, as well as PCB/organic wastes, to an EPA-regulated hazardous waste facility.
Contaminated soil was covered with a synthetic liner and gravel to prevent migration of contamination off-
site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
