NPL Site Narrative for FMC Corp. (Fridley
Plant)
 
FMC CORP. (FRIDLEY PLANT)
Fridley, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : The FMC Corp. Site occupies about 18 acres in Fridley, Minnesota,
adjacent to the Mississippi River. From the early 1950s to the early 1970s, FMC, formerly Northern Pump
Co., disposed of hazardous wastes (including solvents, point sludges, and plating wastes) at two on-
site locations, one an 11-acre unlined landfill. Records indicate that solvents and sludge were dumped
directly into unlined pits and burned or buried. Three wells used by FMC for drinking and processing are
contaminated with various toxic organic chemicals, including trichloroethylene, dichloroethylene, and
methylene chloride. Fridley and Brooklyn Center draw drinking water from the contaminated aquifer. The
ground water also discharges into the Mississippi River, which supplies water to Minneapolis 800 feet
downstream of the FMC property. Low levels of trichloroethylene have been found in the city's drinking
water.
 
Status (July 1983) : On June 8, 1983, FMC, the State, and EPA entered an agreed order under Section
106 of CERCLA. That order provides, among other things, that FMC construct a large clay-lined vault
on an uncontaminated portion of the site and place in it about 58,000 cubic yards of contaminated soils
excavated from the site and from an adjacent property owned by the Burlington Northern Railroad.
FMC did so by June 30, 1983. The order further provides for FMC to reimburse Minnesota and EPA for
expenses (both past and future) related to the order and to apply to EPA for a permit (under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act) for the vault. Finally, FMC has agreed to conduct a study to determine the
extent of ground water contamination at the site and a feasibility study to identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
