NPL Site Narrative for Folkertsma Refuse
 
FOLKERTSMA REFUSE
Grand Rapids, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Folkertsma Refuse Site covers 8 acres in a heavily
industrialized area of Grand Rapids, Kent County, Michigan. From 1965 to 1972, the site operated as a
sanitary landfill and was also licensed by the State to accept industrial waste. Muck was excavated to a
depth of 4 to 10 feet, and the area was filled in with waste; 99 percent of the waste was foundry sand and
the rest was construction debris. According to the original owner, Waste Management of Michigan, Inc.,
owned and operated the site from 1968 to 1972 under the name Industrial Disposal. Again, foundry sand,
which contains iron, was accepted.
 
In 1972, the original owner bought back the property, closed the landfill, and covered it with foundry sand.
Since then, Bergsma Pallet Co., a wood pallet business, has occupied the site.
 
In June 1984, EPA took sediment samples in a drainage ditch that originates in the northwest portion of
the landfill. On-site samples, as well as downstream off-site samples, contain high levels of semivolatile
compounds and heavy metals. The ditch drains into Indian Mill Creek at the south end of the fill via an
unnamed creek and drainage pipe. Indian Mill Creek flows into the Grand River.
 
The majority of waste material disposed of at the site is sand, which is permeable, and is uncapped,
allowing rainwater to percolate easily through the waste. These conditions make ground water
contamination likely if leachable hazardous constituents are present at the site, as previous sampling
indicates.
 
The site is in a river valley directly north of the city limits of Grand Rapids. About 3,600 people draw
drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site. One well is on the site. During the summer, the
Grand Rapids Water Department, which serves 235,000 people, draws water from the Grand River 1.7
miles downstream of the site. The water table is 2 feet below the surface.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is planning a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
