NPL Site Narrative for Forest Glen Mobile
Home Subdivision
 
FOREST GLEN MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION
Niagara Falls, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (August 16, 1989) : The Forest Glen Mobile Home Subdivision is located on Lisa
Lane, Carrie Drive, T Mark Drive, and Edgewood Drive in Niagara Falls, Niagara County, New York. The
21-acre site, now comprised of 52 mobile homes and 2 permanent residences, is between the Conrail
Foote Railroad Yard to the west and Interstate 190 to the east. An estimated 150 people occupy the site.
Adjacent to the railroad yard is the New Road Landfill. A residential area is to the east of Interstate 190,
and another is to the south of the site.
 
Prior to the 1960s, the site was a wooded swampland. Aerial photographs from the mid-1960s reveal
that the area was cleared. During the early 1970s, low-lying areas of the site were filled with unknown
materials. In 1980, the Niagara County Health Department detected phenolic resins, polyvinyl chloride
resins, rubber by-products, and ash in soil. Concrete refuse and industrial machinery were scattered
throughout the 21 acres, with concentrated areas in the Carrie Drive and Lisa Lane cul-de-sac. In 1980,
the Health Department excavated 10 to 12 cubic yards of soil contaminated with phenolic resins from a
resident's yard and transported it to a landfill regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act.
 
Prior to 1973, portions of the site were owned by Michigan-Mayne Realty Co. and three individuals; the
northern undeveloped portion was owned by the Power Authority of the State of New York. The site was
then purchased by Niagara Falls USA Campsite Corp., which divided the property and sold trailer home
lots to approximately 50 families between 1979 and the present.
 
In August 1987, EPA inspected the site and sampled the soil. Analysis of these and subsequent samples
detected high levels of aniline, phenothiazine, benzothiazole, 2-mercapto-benzothiazole, and polyaromatic
hydrocarbons, most of which are used in manufacturing rubber additives.
 
In May 1989, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to remove the crushed remnants of 108 rusted barrels
from a vacant area north and east of the subdivision. The materials have been secured and sampled
pending disposal.
 
On August 3, 1989, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services issued an advisory warning that the site poses a significant
threat to public health because of possible contact with contaminated soils and wastes. Under Section
300.425(c)(3) of the National Contingency Plan, the Federal regulation by which CERCLA is implemented,
a site can be placed on the NPL if (1) a public health advisory has been issued recommending that people
be removed from the site, (2) EPA determines that the site poses a significant threat to public health, and
(3) EPA anticipates that it will be more cost-effective to use its remedial authority (available only at NPL
sites) than its emergency removal authority to respond to the site.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : EPA is arranging for temporary relocation of all subdivision residents.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
