 
 
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
*** NPL Site*** April 2016 
FORMER KIL-TONE COMPANY Vineland, New Jersey Cumberland County 
 
 
  
    Site Location: 
The Former Kil-Tone Company (FKT) site is located at 527 East Chestnut Avenue in the city of Vineland, Cumberland County, New Jersey. The site area includes the former LERCO Company property which is located directly across East Chestnut Avenue from the former Kil- Tone Company and numerous residential properties which surround both the LERCO and former Kil-Tone Company property. 
 Site History: 
FKT operated at the property from the late 1910s, manufacturing arsenic -based pesticides until the late 1930s. Through mergers and acquisitions, the property became known as John Lucas & Company, Inc. and then Sherwin Williams Co. until it ceased operation s in the late 1930s. The property was purchased in 2008 by Urban Manufacturing LLC and the current operator Urban Sign and Crane (USC) manufactures commercial signs. Arsenic is not used by USC in their operations. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The former FKT property, the LERCO property and a number of residential properties have soil contaminated with arsenic and lead above health-based benchmark concentrations. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The contaminated soil extends throughout the FKT  and LERCO property and on a number of residential properties in the surrounding area. Arsenic and lead levels at the site and on residential properties exceed the state residential and non-residential soil cleanup standard. These levels could pose a health hazard to more than 133 residents and workers in the contaminated area. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
Various investigations have been conducted but there have not yet been any response activities. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
Soil contaminated with arsenic and lead at commercial and residential properties requires cleanup to protect human health and the environment. NPL listing has been determined to be the most effective approach for cleanup. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site to the NPL from the state . 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxF AQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
  
