   
   
    
           
  
 
     
       
         
      
       
   
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** July 2017 
Memphis, Tennessee FORMER CUSTOM CLEANERS 
Shelby County 
Site Location:
The Former Custom Cleaners (FCC) site is a former dry cleaner th at is located at 3517 Southern Avenue in Memphis, 
Tennessee. The property is approximately 0.62 acres in size. 
 Site History: 
FCC operated as a dry cleaner for about 45 years from approximately 1950 until the mid-1990s. Custom Cleaners 
used tetrachloroethylene ( PCE) as the dry cleanin g solven t. The site is currently vacant. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
S
oils, indoor air, and ground water have been contaminated with tetrachloroethylene (PCE). PCE has been found above the EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maxi mum Contaminant Levels (MCL) in ground water and at concentrations exceeding screening levels in indoor air and subsurface soil. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : PCE at levels above the MCL is contaminating the on- site monitoring well. There is a potential for the PCE - contaminated ground water to contaminate drinking water wells within the nearby municipal well field (Sheahan Well Field). All 22 wells in the Sheahan Well Field are within two miles of the site. Response Activities (to date): 
The EPA completed a time-critical removal action at the site in October 2016, which included the demolition of 
the FCC building and removal of PCE contaminated soil adjacent and beneath the footprint of the building. 
 Need for NPL List ing: 
T
he state of Tennessee referred the site to the EPA because of the potential impacts of the PCE contamination to the nearby municipal drinking water supply. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA has received a letter in support of proposing to add this site to the NPL from the state. 
[Th e description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS . The description may 
change as
 additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent 
FR n
otices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure 
to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found 
on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp o r by telephone at 1-8 00-C DC -INFO or 1-8 00 -232-4 636. 
