NPL Site Narrative for Fort Dix (Landfill
Site)
 
FORT DIX (LANDFILL SITE)
Pemberton Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Fort Dix is located in Pemberton Township, Burlington
County, New Jersey. The installation covers 31,110 acres and contains built-up areas (cantonment,
hospital, housing, administrative buildings, etc.), training areas, and a test range. Fort Dix's mission is to
provide supervision, training, guidance, financial management, administrative and logistical support, and
other services and support activities. It conducts no industrial activities.
 
This site consists of a 126-acre landfill located 2,200 feet from the southwestern boundary of the
installation. It has been used for the disposal of municipal refuse from Fort Dix and McGuire Air Force Base
and chemical waste from Fort Dix. Adjacent to the landfill is a grease disposal pit. Both the landfill and the
pit are potential sources of contamination.
 
The Army detected methylene chloride and trichloroethylene in Cannon Run, a stream that flows near the
landfill. However, no upstream samples were taken. No critical habitats or wetlands are threatened to date.
 
About 7,300 residents are served by domestic wells within 3 miles of the landfill.
 
Fort Dix is participating in the Installation Restoration Program established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search) and started ground water sampling around
the landfill. Analyses indicate the presence of contaminants such as chloroform, 1,1,1-trichloroethane,
methylene chloride, and toluene.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : In September 1985, EPA, the State, and the Army signed an Administrative
Consent Order agreeing to a workplan which calls for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the landfill and to close the landfill. The Army completed the
remedial investigation in January 1987. The feasibility study is underway.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
