NPL Site Narrative for Fort Riley
 
FORT RILEY
Junction City, Kansas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : Fort Riley is near Junction City, Kansas, north of where the
Republican and Smoky Hill Rivers meet to form the Kansas River. Most of the 152-square-mile Army base
is in Riley County, with the remainder in Geary County. The majority of the developed areas are in the
southern portion, along the Republican and Kansas Rivers. The area around the fort is predominantly rural
and agricultural.
 
Established in 1853, Fort Riley was a major fort in this area during the Civil War. It is currently the
headquarters of the U.S. Army First Infantry Division (mechanized) and host to over a dozen other units
of the Department of Defense. There are six main centers of activity in Fort Riley. Camp Forsyth is on the
floodplain of the Republican River, immediately north of Junction City. Camp Funston is on the floodplain
of the Kansas River, immediately west of the Town of Ogden. Camp Whitside is on the Kansas River
floodplain just west of Camp Funston. The Main Post is on the edge of the Kansas River floodplain across
from Marshall Air Field. Custer Hill is in the upland several miles north of the Kansas River.
 
Operations on the facility have been varied, including seven landfills, numerous motor pools, burn
and firefighting pit areas, hospitals, dry cleaning shops, and pesticide storage and mixing areas. Vinyl
chloride, pesticides, waste motor oils, degreasing solvents, tetrachloroethylene (perchloroethylene), and
mercury were deposited in landfills below the water table and spilled or dumped on the ground adjacent to
buildings. The most serious problems are associated with a sanitary landfill at Camp Funston, spills of dry
cleaning solvents at the Main Post, and pesticide residues, also at the Main Post.
 
Fort Riley is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. A 1984 IRP study indicates that vinyl chloride is present in shallow (15-25 foot)
monitoring wells downgradient of the Camp Funston landfill. The alluvial aquifer along the Republican and
Kansas Rivers is the sole source of drinking water for Fort Riley, Ogden, and Junction City.
 
A Fort Riley water supply well is 0.7 mile from a former dry cleaning building. Municipal and Army wells
within 3 miles of hazardous substances on the base provide drinking water to an estimated 46,800 people.
Ground water is also used locally for irrigation.
 
The Kansas River along Fort Riley is used for fishing and other recreational activities. Bald eagles,
designated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as an endangered species, are seen regularly on the
base.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA, the Army, and the Kansas Department of Health and Environment
(KDHE) are negotiating an Interagency Agreement under CERCLA Section 120. The agreement will
require the Army to submit schedules for all activities and provides for EPA and KDHE oversight of these
activities.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
