NPL Site Narrative for Fort Lewis (Landfill
No. 5)
 
FORT LEWIS (LANDFILL NO. 5)
Tacoma, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Fort Lewis is located near Tacoma in Pierce County,
Washington, on the eastern shore of the southern part of Puget Sound. It has been a U.S. Army facility
since 1917. Industrial operations at Fort Lewis have included maintenance of aircraft and vehicles, repair
and refurbishing of weapons, and neutralization of caustic paint-stripping waste and battery acids. Prior to
the mid-1970s, wastes were disposed of in on-site landfills covering 225 acres. These disposal sites may
have received hazardous wastes such as spent solvents, plating wastes, pesticides, and PCBs. The State
has detected hazardous chemicals, including iron and manganese, in ground water on and off Landfill No.
5, which covers 104 acres. The Army has installed 11 monitoring wells near the landfill.
 
Other operations at Fort Lewis received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA) when the Army filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Fort Lewis is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. In 1983, the Army completed Phase I (records search), which recommended no
further action at that time.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : This specific area is not being investigated at this time due to a higher priority
study associated with a known contamination problem on and off the installation. However, in 1985, a
ground water investigation in the northwest corner of Fort Lewis (not Landfill #5) found trichloroethylene in
ground water. This investigation has gone forward with Defense Environmental Restoration Funds, not the
IRP.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of RCRA. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore,
this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
