NPL Site Narrative for Fort George G.
Meade
 
FORT GEORGE G. MEADE
Odenton, Maryland
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 1997) : Fort George G. Meade (FGGM) is located in the northwestern
corner of Anne Arundel County, Maryland, midway between Baltimore, Maryland, and Washington, D.C.
The boundaries of the facility include the Baltimore-Washington parkway to the northwest, the Little
Patuxent River and AMTRAK railroad tracks to the southeast, residential areas and the Patuxent River to
the southwest, and State Route 175 to the northeast.
 
FGGM's current mission is to provide a wide range of support to 114 tenant organizations from all four
services and to several Federal agencies. Major tenant units include the National Security Agency, the
Defense Information School and the U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command. The population of
FGGM includes approximately 8,000 military personnel, 25,000 civilian employees, and 5,700 family
members of military personnel.
 
Four sources of potential contamination were evaluated: the Defense Property Disposal Office (DPDO)
[now Defense Reutilization Marketing Office (DRMO)] salvage yard (Source 5), the Active Sanitary Landfill
(ASL) (Source 6), the inactive Clean Fill Dump (CFD) (Source 7), and the Post Laundry Facility (PLF)
(Source 10). The DPDO was previously used as a storage area for a wide range of materials including
discarded vehicles, electrical transformers, electrical equipment and scrap metal, as well as a drum
disposal area. Construction of a covered storage facility has been completed at the DPDO to facilitate
recycling of surplus U.S. Government property. Solid wastes were previously disposed at the ASL under
a Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) Solid Waste Division permit. In November 1995, MDE
issued a Disposal Permit that allowed continued operation of the ASL until November 2000. However,
since the issuance of this permit, FGGM has decided to cease solid waste disposal operations and the
ASL was closed in January 1996. The CFD operated from 1972 until 1985 and was used for the disposal of
miscellaneous objects such as timber, concrete, old appliances, fill, garbage, ash and, possibly, hazardous
wastes. The PLF has been in operation since 1941. From 1941 until late 1991, the PLF operated mainly
as a laundry with dry cleaning operations introduced in the late 1960s. In 1991, laundry and dry cleaning
operations were discontinued and the PLF was converted into a recycling center. FGGM continues to
perform environmental investigations at these and other source areas in consultation with Federal and
state regulators.
 
Wastes stored at and disposed of in the source areas were generated from operations at the FGGM
facility. The wastes include municipal and domestic wastes, pesticides, electrical transformers, solvents,
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), inert material, and waste petroleum, oil, and lubricant products.
Hazardous substances detected in the source areas include volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
semivolatile organic compounds (SVOCs), metals, pesticides, and PCBs.
 
A release from the sources to the Upper and Lower Patapsco aquifers of VOCs, SVOCs, and pesticides
has been documented. A release to the Patuxent River watershed of PCBs, VOCs, and pesticides from the
sources has also been documented. The Patuxent River and its tributaries include wetlands, fisheries, and
habitats for endangered species.
 
Status (July 1998) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
