NPL Site Narrative for Fort Wainwright
 
FORT WAINWRIGHT
Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : Fort Wainwright, in Fairbanks North Star Borough near
Fairbanks, Alaska, was established in 1947. Its primary mission is to train soldiers and test equipment in
arctic conditions. Industrial operations primarily involve maintenance of aircraft and vehicles.
 
Fort Wainwright consists of a cantonment area (4,473 acres) on the eastern border of Fairbanks, a range
complex (8,825 acres), and two maneuver areas (898,306 acres). Among contaminated areas on the
cantonment area is a 50-acre sanitary landfill that has received waste oil, waste fuel, spent solvents, paint
residues, and fuel tank sludge since the mid-1950s. The landfill is an unlined, unbermed area that is built
up higher than the surrounding terrain. A second contaminated area is the proposed North Family Housing
Area, which is 3,500 feet from the landfill. The Army used the area for storage of petroleum products,
solvents, and other chemicals and for disposal of power plant ash and slag, which contain heavy metals
such as chromium and mercury.
 
Fort Wainwright is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under
this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. In 1985 and 1986, as part of IRP studies, lead and chromium were detected in
monitoring wells at the landfill; in 1987, chromium and tetrahydrofuran were detected in monitoring wells
at the proposed housing area, and chromium was detected in soil. An estimated 11,000 people, including
the entire population at Fort Wainwright (10,900 people), obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of
hazardous substances on the fort.
 
The Chena River is used for sport fishing within 3 miles downstream.
 
The Army is developing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the
type and extent of contamination at the fort and identify alternatives for remedial action. The workplan is
expected to be completed in the fall of 1989.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA, the Army, and the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation are
in the preliminary stages of negotiating an Interagency Agreement (IAG) under CERCLA Section 120 that
will facilitate the RI/FS. The IAG is expected to be signed in September 1990. The Army will submit RI/FS
workplans for units specified in the IAG under an agreed upon time schedule.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
