 
 
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460   
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Proposed Site*** April 2009 
FOSTER WHEELER ENERGY CORPORATION/CHURCH ROAD TCEMountain Top, Pennsylvania 
Luzerne County 
 
à Site Location: 
The Foster Wheeler Energy Corporation/Church Road TCE (FWEC) site is located at 348 Crestwood Drive, Crestwood Industrial Park, in Mountain Top, Luzerne County, in northeastern Pennsylvania.   
´ Site History: 
FWEC operated at the property from 1953 to 1984.  The operations consisted primarily of the manufacture and fabrication of large pressure vessels.  FWEC used a seal ed vapor degreasing unit containing trichloroethene (TCE) to remove lubricants or cutting oils from the machined parts.  The plant closed in 1984 and was decommissioned.     
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
A ground water plume contaminated with TCE extends beyond 1 mile from FWEC.  There is also an area onsite where soils are contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (P CBs).  PCBs do not appear to have migrated offsite. 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: 
There are 29 residential wells near the site that are c ontaminated with TCE above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level (MCL).  There are an additiona l seven wells that contain TCE but are not above MCL.  All 36 affected residences have been provided with an alternate water supply by FWEC.  In addition to ground water contamination, there is also the potential for vapor intrusion into the basement of the residences overlying the plume.     
3 Response Activities (to date): 
Under an EPA removal consent order, FWEC has been operating a pump and treat system since the early 1990s to remove the TCE from the ground water.  However, this pump and treat system has not been effective in containing the offsite plume, and it continues to move downgradient from the FWEC property.      
} Need for NPL Listing: 
EPA has been working with FWEC to address the imminent  human health threat by ensuring that no one is drinking water contaminated above MCLs.  However, listing the site on the NPL will be the most effective way to address the magnitude and extent of the ground water contamination and ensure long-term monitoring.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.     
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
 
