NPL Site Narrative for Fourth Street
Abandoned Refinery
 
FOURTH STREET ABANDONED REFINERY
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Fourth Street Abandoned Refinery Site occupies
approximately 42 acres at 2200 4th Street in an industrial area in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma County,
Oklahoma. The refinery operated from about 1940 to 1968. Tax records list Slayer Oil as a former owner,
although several other businesses have occupied the site and may have contributed to the contamination.
 
Numerous oil and sludge pits were in use while the refinery was in operation. There is recent evidence of
dumping, including old concrete/building materials and what appears to be Government surplus supplies.
An inactive gas/oil well is also on site.
 
Soil samples collected by EPA in June 1985 and April 1986 contain barium and lead substantially above
background levels. Numerous constituents of crude oil and chlordane were detected; several other
pesticides may also be present.
 
Two interconnected aquifers are present beneath the site. The upper one is associated with alluvial
deposits of the North Canadian River and the lower one is associated with the Garber-Wellington
Formation. The combined aquifers range from about 300 to 900 feet thick. Soil permeability is moderate
to low. Ground water is shallow (15 feet in some cases), which facilitates movement of contaminants into
ground water. About 32,500 people obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site, including
municipal wells serving Del City and Spencer.
 
The nearest surface water is the North Canadian River, 2,600 feet south of the site. Drainage at the site is
to the south and the east along a ditch until run-off collects along the eastern perimeter road.
 
The site is not completely fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact
with hazardous substances.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA has evaluated the site and determined that emergency action is not
warranted at this time.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
