NPL Site Narrative for Franklin Slag Pile
(MDC)
 
FRANKLIN SLAG PILE (MDC)
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 13, 2001) : The Franklin Slag Pile (MDC) site (FSP) is located in the
Port Richmond section of northeast Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The FSP site consists of a large pile of
copper slag situated on an approximately four-acre lot. The volume of the slag pile is approximately 68,000
cubic yards. The slag was generated as a by-product from copper smelting conducted at the adjacent
Franklin Smelting and Refining Corporation (FSRC). MDC Industries (MDC) sold the slag as sand-blasting
grit in 50-pound bags and by the truckload for 40 years. MDC ceased operations and abandoned the site
on December 30, 1999.
 
The slag pile is located on a lot measuring approximately 300 feet by 550 feet. The lot is bordered by
a CONRAIL rail spur to the north; by the lagoon and wetland area belonging to the Philadelphia Water
Department (PWD) Northeast Water Treatment Plant to the north and east; by Delaware Avenue and
Tioga Marine Terminal to the southeast; by Castor Avenue, portions of the former FSRC site, and the
Philadelphia Gas Works (PGW) to the southwest; and by FSRC to the northwest. The Delaware River is
less than 1/4 mile to the southeast. No residents are located within 1/4 mile of the site.
 
While MDC operated, material from the slag pile was observed to have migrated off the property on all four
sides of the site. The entire sidewalk area between MDC and Delaware Avenue was covered in black slag
material. Black slag also covered an inactive rail line bordering the Tioga Marine Terminal on the north
side. Storm drains along Castor and Delaware Avenues, which empty directly into the Delaware River,
were caked with slag that had washed off the property. Slag was observed in a wetland area on the PWD
property. Slag was observed being carried by the wind off the property. Tioga Marine Terminal employees
complained of slag material in their beverages. MDC was cited by EPA Region III Water Protection Division
(WPD) for releasing lead in storm water run-off that was captured by storm drains that discharged into the
Delaware River.
 
Samples of the slag revealed leachable concentrations of lead up to 36,900 micrograms per liter
(µg/L) and concentrations of lead up to 9,060 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg). In January 2000, an
emergency response action was initiated at the site. The action included capping the slag pile in place;
decontaminating and removing equipment stored in the slag pile; removing slag that had spilled off site
onto sidewalks, roads, and adjacent properties; removing visible slag from the wetland adjacent to the
northeastern side of the site; excavating slag and contaminated soil from the active and inactive railroads
located southeast and northwest of the site; and cleaning slag from adjacent storm drains. Not all of the
slag was removed from the surrounding properties.
 
Air samples collected during the emergency response actions revealed an observed release of
beryllium, copper, and lead to air. While MDC operated, MDC was cited for releasing lead into the air at
concentrations exceeding ambient air standards.
 
Status (September 2002) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
