NPL Site Narrative for Franklin Burn
 
FRANKLIN BURN
Franklin Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 1995) : The Franklin Burn site (FBS) is comprised of six separate
parcels of land, located in Franklin Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey. Federal and state
investigations indicate that unpermitted copper reclamation activities occurred at the site, beginning
in or before the early 1960s. Piles of scrap copper wire, capacitors, and transformers were deposited
on the ground and ignited to remove paint and insulation before metal recovery. The burn operations
generated hard-packed black ash piles containing numerous hazardous substances. Four of the six ash
piles (burn sites [BS] 1, 3, 4, and 5) are located north of Marshall Mill Road in Franklin Township. BS 2 is
located approximately 2 miles to the north, east of Lincoln Avenue in Franklin Township. BS 7 is located
approximately 1 mile to the northeast of the clustered Burn Sites, 2,000 feet northwest of Marshall Mill
Road. The six ash pile locations are geographically related, were created through similar activities, contain
similar hazardous substances, and impact the same population, aquifer, and surface waters. All of the
areas that form the FBS are located within rural-residential neighborhoods, with one ash pile (BS 5) located
in the yard of a private residence. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) and
the New Jersey Criminal Justice Department initially investigated the burn operations in the late 1970s.
Subsequent actions included recording complaints from nearby residents, recording violations, conducting
investigations, issuing criminal indictments, and issuing a directive requiring site remediation. However,
burn operations did not cease until 1988. The Gloucester County Department of Health, the NJDEP,
and the Franklinville Police Department began frequent monitoring of the burn sites to ensure that burn
operations were stopped.
 
In May 1989, NJDEP requested that EPA assume the lead role in the assessment and remediation of the
FBS, because the potentially responsible parties were financially unable to comply. In May 1989, EPA
conducted a removal assessment of two black ash pile locations (BS 1 and 2). Chemical analysis of the
ash material indicated the presence of chlorinated dioxins/furans, PCBs, pesticides, and metals. Actions
initiated by EPA included the addition of a chain-link fence surrounding the two assessed areas and the
application of a soil binding polymer to the ash.
 
In April 1991, EPA initiated a site investigation at the FBS to determine whether off-site contaminant
migration was occurring and to assess the potential threat to the environment. During initial
reconnaissance activities three additional ash piles were discovered that showed signs of use (BS 3,
4, and 5). Chemical analysis of ash, soil, and sediment samples collected indicated the presence of
hazardous substances attributable to the FBS.
 
In April 1992, EPA initiated an extent of contamination study at BS 3, 4, and 5. Chemical analysis results
indicated the presence of chlorinated dioxin/furans and metals in ash/soil samples collected in and
surrounding the ash piles.
 
In September 1992, EPA continued their extent of contamination study to characterize contamination at
BS 7. The investigation further defined the extent of contamination at BS 4, 5, and 6 and investigated the
potential contamination of ground water.
 
Subsequent to all investigation activities, the ash and contaminated soil at BS 4, 5, and 7 were removed.
The soils surrounding BS 1, 2, and 3 were excavated and placed into consolidated ash/soil piles that were
covered by temporary caps. All removal activities were completed by EPA in May 1993.
 
Status (June 1996) : The remedial investigation began in the Fall of 1995. The installation and sampling of
ground water monitoring wells will be completed in the Spring of 1996.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
