 OLEM/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May 2018 
FRANKLIN STREET GROUNDWATER Spencer, Indiana  CONTAMINATION Owen County 
  Site Location: The Franklin Street Groundwater Contamination site is a contaminated chlorinated solvent plume with no identified source located in Spencer, Owen County, Indiana. The plume is contaminating the municipal well field.   Site History: The Franklin Street Groundwater Contamination site was first discovered in 2011. In 2014, the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) detected tetrachloroethene (PCE) in raw water at all three active municipal wells. Despite several investigations in the area, the origin of the contamination is unknown.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: The plume consists primarily of the chlorinated solvent PCE. PCE in untreated water has exceeded Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) in one of the municipal wells .   Potential Impacts on Surrounding C ommunity/Environment: Area residents are connected to the municipal water supply distribution systems and use municipal water as their drinking water. The contaminated well field provides water to approximately 9,900 residents in Spencer, Indiana. The wate r is blended and treated before it is distributed to residents.   Response Activities (to date): IDEM has identified approximately nine active and former facilities that could be contributing to the contamination. There are no past or current cleanup response actions at the site.   Need for NPL Listing: The state of Indiana referred the site to the EPA because the site requires further investigation and long term cleanup. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at th is time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notic es]  For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
 
