NPL Site Narrative for Freeway Sanitary
Landfill
 
FREEWAY SANITARY LANDFILL
Burnsville, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : Freeway Sanitary Landfill covers 126 acres in the City
of Burnsville, Dakota County, Minnesota. Dakota County permitted this landfill in 1971 to accept 1,962
acre-feet of household, commercial, demolition, and nonhazardous industrial waste. The permit prohibits
disposal of liquids and hazardous wastes. However, local industries have told the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency (MPCA) that heavy metals (including lead), acids, and bases were accepted by the facility.
 
Richard B. McGowan Co. owns and has been the sole permittee of the Freeway Sanitary Landfill. On
August 24, 1979, the company applied for a permit for a 3-million-cubic-yard vertical expansion of this
landfill. The application is still outstanding, and the currently permitted area is nearing capacity. The
State has delayed action on the application to study the possible effects of the landfill on Burnsville's
wells located 4,000 feet to the south. The well field serves about 36,000 people. In October 1984, volatile
organic chemicals were detected in on-site monitoring wells.
 
A second concern about operations of the landfill is the possible effects of leachate, which contains metals,
on a proposed barge slip (now an active quarry) located 125 feet west of the landfill. The State is also
assessing the hydrogeologic changes expected under the landfill caused by construction of the barge slip.
 
A third concern is the active quarry south of Freeway Sanitary Landfill, which is dewatered and creates an
artificial ground water sink. The State is assessing the effects of leachate generation at Freeway Sanitary
Landfill if the dewatering operations are discontinued in the quarry.
 
A fourth concern is the possible effects of Freeway Sanitary Landfill on the Minnesota River, 400 feet
north of the site, both from indirect discharge through the soil and the proposed barge slip, and from direct
discharge through the drainage way east of the landfill. Additional investigation of the surface water and
bottom sediments of the Minnesota River may be necessary.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
