NPL Site Narrative for Fremont National
Forest/White King and Lucky Lass
Uranium Mines (USDA)
 
FREMONT NATIONAL FOREST/WHITE KING AND LUCKY LASS
URANIUM MINES (USDA)
Lake County, Oregon
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (January 18, 1994) : The Fremont National Forest/White King and Lucky Lass
Uranium Mines site is located approximately 18 miles northwest of Lakeview, Oregon. The White King
Mine is located on U.S. Forest Service and private land and the Lucky Lass Mine is located entirely on
Forest Service land.
 
The mines were operated from 1958 through 1961 and intermittently through 1964. The Atomic Energy
Commission oversaw ore production from the mines. A total of 140 acres were disturbed by mining: 120
acres at White King Mine and 20 acres at Lucky Lass Mine. Contaminant areas include stockpiled ore,
overburden mixed with ore, and acid drainage waste water that has filled the pits created by the mining
activities.
 
The primary hazards posed by the mine waste include gamma radiation exposure from radioactive
constituents, emanation of radon gas, and environmental contamination by heavy metals and the
radioactive constituents in surface and ground water. Surface water and sediments in Auger Creek and
nearby wetlands have been contaminated by mining activities. The creek and surface water bodies
downstream of the site are used as a source of recreational fishing.
 
Status (April 1995) : In October of 1994, the U.S. Forest Service signed a Memorandum of Agreement
(MOA) with EPA and the State of Oregon to: (1) implement a removal action at the Lucky Lass Site during
fiscal year 1995; and (2) complete an RI/FS workplan for characterization of the site. An Engineering
Evaluation/Cost Analysis (EE/CA) has been completed for the removal action and public comments are
being addressed. The RI/FS workplan is nearing completion. The agencies are currently negotiating with a
PRP to implement the RI/FS workplan with RI sampling scheduled to begin in the summer of 1995.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
