NPL Site Narrative for Fridley Commons
Park Well Field
 
FRIDLEY COMMONS PARK WELL FIELD
Fridley, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 29, 1998) : The Fridley Commons Park Well Field site is a
trichloroethylene (TCE) plume located within a 45 acre active ground water well field in Fridley, Minnesota.
The City of Fridley, with an approximate population of 29,000, operates 13 public water supply wells. Eight
of these wells are located in the Commons Park well field. Four of the Commons Park wells are open to the
Prairie du Chien Jordan aquifer. Several other public water supply wells for other municipalities are located
within a 4-mile radius of the Commons Park well field.
 
In February, 1984, trichloroethylene (TCE) was detected in municipal well no. 9, one of the four Commons
Park wells open to the Prairie du Chien Jordan aquifer. Subsequent testing indicated the presence of
TCE in the three other Commons Park wells open to this aquifer (municipal well nos. 6, 7, and 8). TCE
was detected in well no. 9 at concentrations in excess of federal drinking water standards, and, at the
recommendation of the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH), the City of Fridley removed the well from
service in November, 1989. Though TCE has been detected in municipal well nos. 6, 7, and 8, these wells
have remained in service. The City has continued to monitor the affected wells as required by MDH.
 
The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency has conducted investigations since the closure of well no. 9 in an
attempt to identify a source of the TCE contamination. While over 50 potential contaminant sources have
been identified through file searches, an exact source or sources of the contamination has not yet been
identified.
 
Status (January 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
