NPL Site Narrative for Friedman Property
 
FRIEDMAN PROPERTY
Upper Freehold Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 23, 1981) : The Friedman Property is located in Upper Freehold
Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey. The 3-acre site lies just across the boundary from Plumstead
Township and is immediately adjacent to an unnamed tributary to Lahaway Creek, which is itself a tributary
of the Delaware River. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, free-flowing liquids, household wastes, and
demolition debris were dumped into a natural ditch and then covered over. Several residences and two
trailer parks within 0.3 mile of the site have private wells. Four monitoring wells installed in 1980 by New
Jersey detected heavy metals and a number of organic pollutants. Organic chemicals were present in an
adjacent stream.
 
The site was originally proposed under the name "Upper Freehold Site."
 
Status (September 21, 1984) : EPA and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
are planning a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) covering the air, soils, wastes, ground water,
surface water, and adjacent stream sediments.
 
Status (March 8, 1986) : The RI indicated that limited contamination was present at the site, and that
the site was not used as a hazardous waste disposal facility. Its wastes were no different than those of
a typical municipal landfill. Air monitoring during the RI/FS did not show levels above ambient air quality
standards, and no complaints of odors or fumes were received from area citizens before or during testing,
or from personnel conducting the RI/FS.
 
Ground water testing included the installation of six monitoring wells and sampling of domestic wells in the
vicinity of the site. The shallow ground water had slightly elevated levels of zinc -- below 0.5 milligram per
liter (mg/l) -- and 0.03 mg/l of phenols. These levels are below current EPA Health Effects Assessment
levels of 7.4 mg/l for zinc and 3.5 mg/l for phenols. Analysis of deep ground water revealed zinc at levels
comparable to surface levels. The only similarity between the shallow and deep ground water was in
naturally occurring zinc. Since similar chemicals were not found in the two aquifers, and geologic analysis
indicated no interconnections, there was no indication that the lower aquifer was contaminated or will be in
the future.
 
The RI/FS indicated that the adjacent stream sediments had not been significantly contaminated by
materials found at the site, although trace contamination consistent with routine road maintenance
practices from the adjacent highway was found.
 
In summary, the RI/FS concluded that there are no significant sources of contamination at the site, and
contaminants have not migrated from the site and are not expected to migrate.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because, based on the RI, EPA, in consultation with the State
of New Jersey, determined that the site poses no significant threat to public health or the environment
and, therefore, remedial measures are not appropriate. However, EPA and the NJDEP have agreed that
the shallow aquifer in the vicinity of the site will be monitored as a precautionary measure to ensure that
current site conditions do not change. The State is responsible for periodic ground water monitoring for 5
years. State monitoring to date indicates that conditions remain unchanged.
 
As an additional precaution, EPA recommended to State, county, and local officials that a notice be placed
on the property deed and the plot plan amended. The deed notice and plot restrictions would be entered in
county land records. They would note that the site had previously been used for waste disposal and restrict
on-site excavations, agricultural use, and residential use.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
