NPL Site Narrative for Fruit Avenue Plume
 
FRUIT AVENUE PLUME
Albuquerque, New Mexico
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 1999) : The Fruit Avenue Plume site consists of a plume of
trichloroethylene-contaminated ground water in the aquifer underlying downtown Albuquerque, Bernalillo
County, New Mexico. Despite extensive efforts by the New Mexico Environment Department (NMED) over
the past 9 years, the source of the ground water contamination has yet to be identified.
 
In April 1989, contamination was detected in a Coca-Cola Bottling Plant well during routine compliance
sampling by the City of Albuquerque Environmental Health Department (CAEHD). Trichloroethylene
(TCE) was detected at a level of 14.5 micrograms per liter (µg/l), 9.5 µg/l above the maximum contaminant
level (MCL) of trichloroethylene in drinking water of 5 µg/l. Subsequent sampling of the well in July 1989
indicated the presence of TCE at 13.1 µg/l. Based on these results and a recommendation from CAEHD,
the Coca-Cola Bottling Company discontinued use of the well in July 1989.
 
In response to the discovery of TCE contamination, NMED initiated a Preliminary Assessment in
December 1989 of the area surrounding the Coca-Cola Bottling Plant well. NMED identified five potential
sources of the ground water contamination in the downtown Albuquerque area. Subsequent investigations
were conducted from 1990 to 1998 to identify the source of the contamination and assess ground water
conditions. These investigations included collection and analysis of subsurface soil samples, installation
of ground water monitoring wells, and collection and analysis of ground water samples. TCE and a related
substance, tetrachloroethylene (PCE), were detected in numerous ground water samples within the area
of the plume. Though potential sources of contamination were identified during these investigations, the
information collected to date has not been adequate to directly attribute the contamination to one or more
of these sources.
 
In the absence of a specific source of contamination, the Fruit Avenue Plume site has been identified
as a plume of contaminated ground water that includes 14 monitoring wells and a closed, private water
supply well at which significant levels of contamination have been detected. These 15 wells are located
approximately 2 miles east of the Rio Grande River in downtown Albuquerque. The area is approximately
bounded by Fruit Avenue to the north, Elm Street to the east, Tijeras/Martin Luther King Avenue to the
south, and 4th Street to the west. The 15 wells are located in the Santa Fe Group aquifer, which includes
hydraulically connected alluvial fan deposits and valley alluvium in the Albuquerque area. The maximum
concentration of TCE detected within the plume to date is 76 µg/l, more than 15 times the 5 µg/l MCL. The
maximum concentration of PCE detected within the plume is 15 µg/l, 10 µg/l above the MCL for PCE of 5
µg/l.
 
The City of Albuquerque relies on water withdrawn from the Sante Fe Group aquifer for its sole source
of drinking water. New Mexico and the Albuquerque Basin have long histories of imbalance between
water needs and availability. The climate is such that naturally occurring surface water supplies are not
dependable. As such, ground water is the primary source of water for urban, rural, commercial, and
industrial uses in the Albuquerque Basin. Albuquerque operates 88 ground water supply wells providing
drinking water to more than 400,000 individuals. Thirty-six of these wells are completed in the Sante Fe
Group aquifer within 4 miles of the site. An active private well is also completed in the aquifer within this
distance. Combined, public and private wells within 4 miles of the site supply the needs of close to 200,000
individuals. Contamination has not been detected in these wells to date.
 
Status (October 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
