NPL Site Narrative for Fulton Avenue
 
FULTON AVENUE
North Hempstead, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 1997) : The Fulton Avenue site is located on the west central portion
of the Garden City Industrial Park. This property has been active since the early 1960s, and various
tenants have occupied the property since that time including Genesco, Inc. (1964 to 1976), Halperin
Knitting Mills (1975 to 1976), Robelan Displays, Inc. (1977 to an unknown date), and Cymann Designs, Inc.
(1988 to present). Halperin Knitting Mills operated as a cutting mill. Knit fabrics were received in tubular
form and the fabrics were then cut, cleaned, and sewed together. Waste products generated by Halperin
included waste oils from the dry cleaning operation. Robelan Displays, Inc., manufactured displays at the
site. Materials utilized in this process included paints and lacquer thinners. Cymann Designs is a furniture
distribution warehouse.
 
In 1985, during a Nassau County Department of Health (NCDH) ground water contamination study, the
Garden City Industrial Park was identified as a potential source for volatile organic compound (VOC)
contamination in the ground water. In 1991, the NCDH, together with the Nassau County Department
of Public Works (NCDPW), conducted a ground water study of the Garden City Industrial Park. During
this investigation, twelve additional monitoring wells were installed within and downgradient of the park,
and two monitoring wells were installed upgradient of the park. Two rounds of samples were collected
from these wells, as well as the existing wells, and analysis indicated the presence of VOCs, including
tetrachloroethene (PCE).
 
In 1994, a Preliminary Site Assessment (PSA) was conducted by the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC). The study area investigated during this PSA included
approximately 40 acres of the Garden City Industrial Park. During the PSA 61 ground water samples were
collected and analyzed at an on-site mobile laboratory. Analysis of the ground water samples indicated
the presence of numerous VOCs, including PCE and trichloroethene (TCE). Based on these results, it was
alleged that a source entry for the PCE contamination is present at 150 Fulton Avenue.
 
Also as part of the PSA, an industrial survey was conducted by NYSDEC at several facilities within
the Garden City Industrial Park, including Cymann Designs, Inc. Cymann Designs, Inc. is a wholesale
distribution warehouse that reportedly does not use any chemicals in their business. Prior to Cymann
Designs, Inc. a dry cleaner of cloth material occupied the building.
 
In 1995, NYSDEC conducted additional sampling at the Garden City Industrial Park. One of these samples
included a sediment sample collected from a dry well located at 150 Fulton Avenue. Analysis of this
sample indicated the presence of 5,300,000 parts per billion of PCE.
 
On June 18, 1996, a cooperative sampling event was conducted for the Fulton Avenue site by NYSDEC
and EPA. During this sampling event, ground water samples were collected from several monitoring wells
located within the Garden City Industrial Park. Analysis of the samples collected from these wells indicated
the presence of PCE, TCE, and 1,2-dichloroethene (total) in wells downgradient of the dry well located at
150 Fulton Avenue.
 
Drinking water wells tapping the Upper Glacial - Magothy Aquifer System within four miles of the site
serve an aggregate population of 100,528 people. The site is located over a New York State-designated
Wellhead Protection Area.
 
Status (March 1998) : Currently, two Interim Remedial Measures (IRMs) are planned for the site, one
for soils in the immediate vicinity of the dry well, and a second for nearby ground water. The soil IRM will
consist of removing contaminated sediments and soils from the base of the dry well, remediating the deep
soils using two technologies entitled Air Sparging/Soil Vapor Extraction (AS/SVE). The design for the soil
IRM is currently under review. The nearby ground water within the shallow Upper Glacial aquifer will be
remediated using an in-well air-stripping system. The conceptualization for this remediation technology is
currently being prepared. The Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) workplan is currently being
reviewed.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
