OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST  (NPL)   
***NPL Site***      March 2022 
     GALEY AND LORD PLANT Society Hill, South Carolina Darlington County 
 
 Site Location: Galey and Lord Plant is a former textile dyeing and finishing plant, located in northeastern South Carolina, at 670 North Main Street in Society Hill. The site abuts Cedar Creek and the Great Pee Dee River. The surrounding area includes  extensive wetlands, vacant land, and residential land.   Site History: The site occupies about 235 acres and was associated with multiple textile manufacturing facilities between 1966 and 2016. Operations began in 1966 which included dyeing, finishing, and surface treatment of cotton and synthetic fabrics. The plant was abandoned in 2016, without properly closing wastewater treatment facilities and associated basins located adjacent to the Great Pee Dee River. As a result of textile operations, the wetlands and sediments of Cedar Creek and the Great Pee Dee River are contaminated with metals, perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid  (PFOS). PFOA and PFOS are fluorinated, organic, man-made compounds that are used to make fluoropolymer coatings and products that resist heat, oil, stains, grease, and water. Additionally, in 2018 Hurricane Florence made landfall and  caused the release of wastewater to Cedar Creek and the Great Pee Dee River.   Site Contamination/Contaminants:  Soils are contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), trichloroethene (TCE), benzo(a)pyrene, cadmium, chromium, copper, and manganese, among others. Wastewater basins contain PFOA, PFOS, arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, manganese, and mercury. Wetlands aligning Cedar Creek and the Great Pee Dee River are  contaminated with PFOA, PFOS, arsenic, chromium, copper, lead, and manganese. Groundwater is contaminated with  PFOA, PFOS, TCE, cis-1,2- dichloroethylene (DCE), and vinyl chloride.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Contamination poses risks to both human health and the environment. The Great Pee Dee River is used for recreational  fishing, thus posing a potential threat to human health through the consumption of fish. The wetlands aligning Cedar  Creek and the Great Pee Dee River are contaminated.   Response Activities (to date): 
 
 
 
In 2013, the potential responsible party entered into a Voluntary Cleanup Contract (VCC) with the state. The VCC was  terminated in 2017 for failure to complete work. In 2019, the EPA categorized and removed 2,400 containers of  abandoned chemicals. 
 
 Need for NPL Listing: The state of South Carolina referred the site to the EPA because contamination has migrated beyond the facility to  downstream water bodies used for fishing and has i mpacted sensitive environments (wetlands). Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support from the state for  placing this site on the NPL. 
 
[The description of the site (release ) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may  change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs  
can be found on 
the Internet at https:// www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
