 
 OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
  N ATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST (NPL)   
***Final Site***           December 2013 
GARDEN CITY GROUND WATER PLUME
 Garden City, Indiana Bartholomew County
  
  Site Location: The Garden City Ground Water Plume is located in the unincorporated town of Garden City in Bartholomew County, Indiana, approximately one mile south of the city of Columbus. Garden City is in the flood plain of the east fork of the White River. The Garden City Ground Water Plume has affected residential and commercial drinking water wells and covers approximately 3.4 acres.   Site History: Since 1990, drinking water wells in Garden City have had intermittent trichloroethene (TCE) contamination, which has sometimes exceeded drinking water standards. Despite several investigations in the area, the origin of the TCE is unknown.   Si
te Contamination/Contaminants: The ground water plume consists of TCE.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: The town includes approximately 50 individual residences and a mobile home park. Garden City residential wells obtain drinking water from one common aquifer. All the residences, mobile homes and businesses in Garden City that are served by private ground water wells may be affected by the TCE plume.   Response Activities (to date): The Indiana Department of Environmental Management supplies and maintains carbon filtration systems on three residential wells. Attempts to establish a water line main system in Garden City have not been financially feasible.   Nee
d for NPL Listing: The state of Indiana referred the site to the EPA because the site requires a long-term response and action and listing will allow for a proper and timely investigation of the nature and extent of contamination. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing the site on the NPL from the state of Indiana. 
               
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at  http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp 
or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
