NPL Site Narrative for Garland Creosoting
 
GARLAND CREOSOTING
Longview, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 1999) : The Garland Creosoting site is located in Gregg County, Longview,
Texas, and encompasses the approximately 12-acre property formerly used by the Garland Creosoting
Company for the manufacture of creosote-treated wood products. Garland Creosoting Company began
wood treating operations at the facility in 1960 and filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 1997.
Investigations conducted while the facility was operational and subsequent to its closure indicate that
hazardous substances used in the wood treating process have contaminated on-site soil, ground water
underlying the site, and nearby surface waters.
 
Prior to 1985, wastewater generated by the Garland Creosoting facility system was treated and
discharged to five surface impoundments to allow evaporation. Bottom sludges created in the surface
impoundments are classified as a hazardous waste under the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA). Reportedly, the facility discontinued use of the surface impoundments in 1985 and diverted
treated wastewater to the City of Longview wastewater collection and treatment system. A sixth surface
impoundment was used at the facility to contain wastewater in the event of a spill from the process area or
wastewater treatment plant.
 
In May 1986, Garland Creosoting decided to close the five surface impoundments used as wastewater
evaporation ponds. A subsurface investigation indicated that the ground water in the vicinity of the
impoundments was contaminated, and 12 ground water monitoring wells were installed. In November
1989, the five surface impoundments were capped, leaving the creosote contaminated sludge and soil
in place. In June 1990, the facility was issued a post-closure care permit for the impoundments requiring
that Garland Creosoting install, operate, and monitor a ground water recovery system to address the
contamination. A ground water collection trench was installed to intercept free creosote product and
creosote-contaminated ground water. The trench drained into a sump from which the recovered ground
water was pumped to the wastewater treatment system and, following treatment, discharged into the City
of Longview system. During operation of the system, the facility reported the presence of free creosote
product in some of the monitoring wells and ground water contamination by creosote-related substances.
 
In May 1997, following Garland Creosoting's bankruptcy filing, TNRCC inspected the facility. The
inspection revealed that the ground water treatment system had ceased operation and a dark oily
substance was observed flowing downhill from the ground water collection trench sump into an intermittent
creek running along the southern border of the site. TNRCC inspectors observed a 1,400-square-foot area
of soil saturated with creosote between the sump and the intermittent creek. Stressed vegetation, stained
soil, and creosote seeps were noted along the bank of the intermittent creek. Ten 55-gallon drums with
labels indicating hazardous wastes were found in an unlocked building. TNRCC initiated an emergency
response action in May 1997 to abate ongoing discharges and stabilize the site.
 
The intermittent creek along which the stressed vegetation, stained soil, and creosote seeps were
observed runs downstream approximately 1/3 mile where it meets the Iron Bridge Creek southwest of the
site. Approximately 1 and 3/4 miles downstream from its confluence with the intermittent creek, Iron Bridge
Creek flows into the Sabine River. During a November 1997 TNRCC site visit, seven sediment samples
were taken from the intermittent creek and Iron Bridge Creek. Analyses of these samples indicated the
presence of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and dibenzofuran, contaminants commonly
associated with creosoting processes. PAHs and other creosote-related contaminants were detected in
samples collected from the surface impoundments, ground water collection sump, and intermittent creek.
 
Both Iron Bridge Creek and Sabine River are actively fished for flathead catfish, blue catfish, white bass,
channel catfish, crappie, large mouth bass, and spotted bass. According to the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, these fish are primarily caught for human consumption. In addition, wetlands exist along
the banks of Iron Bridge Creek and Sabine River throughout the 15-mile distance considered potentially
susceptible to contamination from the site. The paddlefish, a listed endangered species in the State of
Texas, inhabits the waters at the confluence of Sabine River and Iron Bridge Creek, and is also considered
potentially susceptible to contamination from the site.
 
Status (October 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
