 
 
OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch  Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2005 
GARVEY ELEVATOR Hastings, Nebraska 
Adams County 3rd  Congressional District 
 
à Site Location/Size: 
The Garvey Elevator is a commercial grain elevator located 0.5 mile southwest of Hastings, Nebraska, in Adams County. The Garvey Elevator facility covers 106 acres of land, 22 of which are improved.   
 
´ Site History: 
The Garvey Elevator terminal consists of a concrete el evator head house with a total of 258 bins and 4,733,000 bushels of storage capacity. Chemical storage tanks at the fac ility included a 3,000 gallon aboveground storage tank, installed in 1960 and removed in 1986, which contained liquid fumigant. The li quid fumigant, which was applied to grain in all upright grain storage areas, was composed of 80 percent carbon tetrachloride (CCl
4) and 20 percent carbon bisulfide. The underground service pipe between the tank and th e elevator leaked and was repaired, but the exact date of the pipe repair or the amount of liquid fumigant that was lo st through the leak is undetermined. The facility ceased use of the liquid fumigant in 1985. 
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
At the site, ground water from one municipal well and multiple private drinking water wells is contaminated with CCl 4. In addition, soil and soil gas sampling have detected CCl
4 at the Garvey Elevator facility, and monitoring wells have documented a release of CCl
4 to the aquifer under the facility.   
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Multiple private drinking water wells located downgrad ient from the facility are contaminated with CCl 4. Investigations by Garvey Elevator cont ractors, Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services and EPA Region 7 documented CCl
4 in private drinking water wells exceeding EPA’s health-based benchmarks. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
To date, approximately 30 residential homes and/or businesses have been supplied some type of alternate water. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination.  See 56 FR 5600,  February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
 For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs.  ATSDR ToxFAQs can  be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
