NPL Site Narrative for General Tire &
Rubber Co. (Mayfield Landfill)
 
GENERAL TIRE & RUBBER CO. (MAYFIELD LANDFILL)
Mayfield, Kentucky
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : General Tire & Rubber Co. operates a plant in Graves County
approximately 2.7 miles north of Mayfield, Kentucky. A 58.5-acre landfill is 0.3 mile northeast of the plant
adjacent to and east of the Illinois Central Railroad and approximately 300 feet west of Mayfield Creek.
 
The landfill began accepting hazardous wastes in 1969 shortly after the operation was approved by the
State of Kentucky. Disposal consisted of a series of trenches, approximately 1,300 feet long, 40 feet wide,
and 10 to 30 feet deep, excavated in a north-south direction. Approximately 200 tons of contained and
noncontained hazardous wastes were mixed together with nonhazardous wastes and deposited in the
trenches. Hazardous substances included 1,1,1-trichloroethane, toluene, naphtha, and trace amounts
of lead and cadmium, according to information the company provided to EPA as required by CERCLA
Section 103(c).
 
The water table occurs 21 feet below the ground surface. Soils in the landfill area are highly permeable,
which facilitates movement of contaminants into the ground water. Six public water supply wells have been
identified within 3 miles of the landfill. The Hickory and Hardeman Water Districts each own three wells
which extend 300 feet into the Tallahatta Formation. These potentially affected wells serve an estimated
5,000 people.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : EPA is investigating the possibility of General Tire & Rubber Co. conducting
a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and
identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
