NPL Site Narrative for General Electric Co.
(Spokane Apparatus Service Shop)
 
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO. (SPOKANE APPARATUS SERVICE
SHOP)
Spokane, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : General Electric Co.'s Spokane Apparatus Service Shop covers
slightly less than 1 acre in a mixed-use neighborhood in Spokane, Spokane County, Washington. General
Electric cleaned and repaired electrical transformers on-site during 1961-80. Waste PCB-laden oils were
stored on-site and were also disposed of in on-site dry wells that were connected to the sewer.
 
After the Washington Department of Ecology (WDOE) found high levels of PCBs in on-site soils,
General Electric began an investigation in 1986 with WDOE oversight. The company found PCBs and
trichloroethylene significantly above background levels in ground water. The site overlies the Spokane
Valley-Rathdrum Prairie Aquifer, which EPA has designated under the Safe Drinking Water Act as a sole
source of drinking water for the area. Wells within 3 miles of the site supply drinking water for almost
200,000 people.
 
At the request of WDOE, General Electric will expand its investigation and undertake more sampling.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : With WDOE oversight, General Electric is conducting a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action. The RI has found high levels of PCBs and elevated levels of heavy metals, chlorinated
benzenes, volatile organic compounds, and petroleum hydrocarbons in soils at the site. PCBs, petroleum
hydrocarbons, and several volatile organic compounds were found in ground water. GE has extended a
fence surrounding the site to prevent unauthorized access. The RI is scheduled to be completed by the
end of 1989 and the FS by mid-1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
