 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2010 
GENERAL DYNAMICS  LONGWOOD  Longwood , Florida   
 Seminole County  
 
 Site Location: 
General Dynamics Longwood (General Dynamics) is located at 1333 North U.S. Highway 17/92 in Longwood, Seminole County, Florida.  The General Dynamics property consists of four parcels covering approximately 10 acres. 
 
 Site History: 
General Dynamics Corporation and its predecessors manufactured printed circuit boards and conducted painting and plating operations on the property.  The printed circuit boards were cleaned in a vapor degreaser, which used the chemical trichloroethene (TCE).  TCE was stored in 55- gallon drums and in an above-ground storage tank on the eastern portion of the property.  General Dynamics Corporation occupied the site from the mid 1960s to the early 1980s.  The property, which was purchased by Gould Publications in 1993, is now being used for wholesaling and warehouse activities.  The Sprague Electric Company (SEC) site is adjacent to General Dynamics, and SEC’s and Gener al Dynamics’ ground water contamination has co-mingled.    
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Three areas of contaminated soil have been identified on the General Dynamics property .  The contaminants of concern are TCE, and its breakdown products (1,1-dichloroethene [DCE], and cis-1,2-DCE), arsenic, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, and silver.  Ground water underlying the General Dynamics property contains chromium as well as TCE and its breakdown products (1,1-DCE, cis-1,2-DCE, trans-1,2-DCE, and vinyl chloride).  These contaminants have been detected at concentrations exceeding their respective EPA  Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) in the surficial aquifer.  The surficial and Upper Floridi an aquifers are interconnected. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
About 114,742 people within a 4-mile radius of the General Dynamics property are provided drinking water from municipal ground water wells.  The closest municipal well is located between 0.25 and 0.5 mile fro m the General Dynamics property.    
 Response Activities (to date): 
The responsible parties are conducting cleanup activities at the SEC property as well as on the General Dynamics property as part of an Administrative Order of Consent (AOC) with EPA, signed July 30, 2004.  The AOC currently includes the SEC property as well as the western portion of the General Dynamics property.    
 Need for NPL Listing: 
Listing on the NPL will allow EPA to pursue a comprehensive cleanup to address human health and environmental risks posed by the site.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the s tate.   
[The description of the site (release) is based on inf ormation available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrat ive summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs ca n be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
  
