NPL Site Narrative for Geneva Industries/
Fuhrmann Energy
 
GENEVA INDUSTRIES/FUHRMANN ENERGY
Houston, Texas
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : The Geneva Industries/Fuhrmann Energy Corp. Site covers
13 acres in Houston, Texas. It is an abandoned petrochemical manufacturing and reprocessing facility.
Five companies have owned the site since it began operation in 1970. The present owner (Fuhrmann)
is salvaging the remaining equipment on-site. At least one of the previous owners used the facility to
manufacture chlorinated biphenyls, PCBs, and phenoxy phenol. State and county officials have cited
previous and/or present owners for permit violations, spills, and discharges.
 
EPA and State testing has confirmed contamination of the shallow aquifer with PCBs, xylene, and other
organic compounds, and releases of PCBs in surface run-off to an adjacent flood control channel.
 
In June 1983, using $75,000 in CERCLA emergency funds, EPA fenced an area adjacent to the site where
drums had been buried and tested an abandoned chlorine tank, which was confirmed to be empty.
 
Status (June 1984) : In February 1984, EPA removed deteriorating drums, PCB-contaminated waste piles,
waste water from lagoons and tanks, and 3,800 tons of PCB-contaminated sludge, soil, and sediments
from the site. Lagoons and ponds were backfilled and capped, and a diked tank area was stabilized and
capped. Cost of the project was $1.6 million in CERCLA emergency funds.
 
The State and EPA have signed a Cooperative Agreement covering a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action. On-site field work began June 18, 1984.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
