NPL Site Narrative for George Air Force
Base
 
GEORGE AIR FORCE BASE
Victorville, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : George Air Force Base (GAFB) occupies 5,347 acres in the
Mojave Desert region near Victorville, San Bernardino County, California. It was established in 1941 to
conduct tactical fighter operations and provide training for aircraft and maintenance personnel. Industrial
operations, including maintenance of aircraft and ground support equipment, involved use and disposal of
solvents.
 
GAFB is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. During IRP tests conducted between March and May 1986, the Air Force discovered
trichloroethylene (TCE) in ground water on and off the base. The northeast section of GAFB, used for
disposal of solvents, appears to be one source of the contamination, although several other areas on
the base are also suspected of contributing to the contamination. In addition to TCE, benzene and 1,2-
dichloroethane were detected in on-base monitoring wells at levels that exceed State and Federal drinking
water standards. An estimated 11,000 people obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of hazardous
substances on the base. The wells are upgradient of known contamination.
 
GAFB has installed additional wells to determine the extent of TCE contamination. Remedial action is
planned to recover, treat, and dispose of contaminated ground water. The California Regional Water
Quality Control Board is reviewing GAFB's workplan for these activities. GAFB is in the process of
contracting for the remedial action.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : GAFB has contracted for the remedial action, which is scheduled to begin
early in 1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
