NPL Site Narrative for Glen Ridge Radium
Site
 
GLEN RIDGE RADIUM SITE
Glen Ridge, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Glen Ridge Radium Site is in a residential neighborhood
in Glen Ridge, Essex County, New Jersey. Radioactive material, believed to be radium-processing waste,
was used as fill, resulting in unacceptable levels of radon gas and its decay products in a number of
private residences. Approximately 25,000 cubic yards of contaminated material are scattered throughout a
neighborhood of about 0.50 square mile.
 
Several years ago, the State started to investigate a radium-processing facility in Orange that had ceased
operation in the 1920s. The possibility of off-site disposal of processing waste prompted an aerial survey
of surrounding areas for gamma radiation. In July 1983, the survey identified a number of homes with high
levels of radon gas. About 60 people are immediately affected.
 
In December 1983, EPA started a major field investigation to define the perimeter of contamination and
identify additional problem homes. Using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA installed ventilation systems in
affected homes as a temporary corrective measure.
 
Status (February 14, 1985) : This site, along with the Montclair/West Orange Radium Site, is being added
to the NPL because it involves a serious problem that requires taking immediate remedial action.
 
In September 1985, EPA completed a remedial investigation/feasibility study. About 60 homes were
identified as being affected in the site area. The results were announced at a public meeting in November
1985. EPA is scheduled to make its final decision on the remedy selected in April 1986.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
