NPL Site Narrative for Global Sanitary
Landfill
 
GLOBAL SANITARY LANDFILL
Old Bridge Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Global Sanitary Landfill covers 23.37 acres in Old Bridge
Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey. It had a permit from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) to accept nonhazardous waste.
 
The landfill borders Cheesquake Creek Tidal Marsh on three sides. In April 1984, after heavy rains, two
consecutive high tides occurred in the wetlands. A portion of the southern side of the landfill collapsed and
slid into the adjoining wetlands. NJDEP closed the landfill later in 1984.
 
In 1983-84, NJDEP detected methylene chloride, chloroform, trichloroethylene, benzene, and other
chemicals in leachate seeping from the site into the wetlands, thus threatening surface water in the area.
 
Underlying the site is the most productive aquifer in the Raritan Formation, the Old Bridge Sand Aquifer,
which is overlain by the Amboy Stoneware Clay. This layer of clay, which ranges from 0-30 feet thick, is
absent in the northwest corner of the landfill, thus permitting contaminants from the landfill to reach the Old
Bridge Sand Aquifer. The Sayreville Water Co. has five water supply wells within 1 mile of the site; three
of them draw from the Old Bridge Sand Aquifer. Approximately 86,000 people depend on wells within 3
miles of the site as their sole source of drinking water. The water supplies for Sayreville, Laurence Harbor,
South Amboy, and Perth Amboy are threatened. Raritan Bay, which is approximately 2 miles from the site,
is used for recreational activities.
 
NJDEP is overseeing a subsurface investigation by a contractor for the owner to locate an estimated
100,000 drums containing paint, paint thinner, and various solvents. Two former landfill employees allege
the drums were buried during 1968-77.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
