 
   
     
    
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2009 
GMH ELECTRONICS Roxboro, North Carolina Person County 
Site Location: The GMH Electronics site is located at the intersection of Halifax Road and Virgilina Road in Roxboro, North Carolina. The approximate size of the property is 0.5 acres. Site History: GMH Electronics produced electronic parts, including printed circuit boards.  Parts were washed with chlorinated solvents in three industrial washing machines on site.  Washing solution was then run through carbon filters and discharged to the onsite septic system.  GMH Electronics is no longer in operation. Site Contamination/Contaminants: The contaminants of concern are volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which include 1,1-dichloroethene, 1,1- dichloroethane, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, chloromethane, and vinyl chloride. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Ground water contaminated with VOCs above EPA’s Safe Dr inking Water Act maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) has contaminated private drinking water wells in the area. Response Activities (to date): Sixteen private homes and one business were provided bottle d water as an emergency response action by EPA.  Seven of the homes were also provided whole-house carbon filtration systems. Need for NPL Listing: The State of North Carolina referred the site to EPA because  of the large number of contaminated residential wells.  The state does not have the resources to address the site.  NPL listing would support remediation of the contaminated ground water and mitigate the spread of the contamination.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
