NPL Site Narrative for Golden Strip Septic
Tank Service, Inc.
 
GOLDEN STRIP SEPTIC TANK SERVICE, INC.
Simpsonville, South Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Golden Strip Septic Tank Service, Inc. Site consists
of five abandoned lagoons covering 2 acres on a farm in Greenville County, South Carolina, near
Simpsonville. The lagoons are unlined and have no structures to prevent rainfall run-off from leaving the
lagoons. Between 1960 and 1975, the company deposited plating wastes and other liquids from nearby
industries into the lagoons.
 
In 1978, two lagoons that had dried up were filled with dirt and graded. No sludge was removed. Two
other lagoons still contain liquid waste and sludge. The fifth lagoon, which reportedly received only a small
volume of waste, was also filled with dirt.
 
Data collected by the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC) in 1981
and by EPA in 1984 indicate that chromium, copper, lead, and cadmium are in the water in the unlined
lagoons, thus threatening ground water and surface water in the area. An estimated 1,600 people draw
drinking water from springs and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Rice Spring is approximately 500 feet from the lagoons. EPA tests conducted in 1985 show that stream
sediments near the spring basin contain heavy metals (including chromium, copper, and nickel) and
organic compounds. The site is in the drainage basin of Gilder Creek, which is used for recreational
activities within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
