NPL Site Narrative for Goldisc
Recordings, Inc.
 
GOLDISC RECORDINGS, INC.
Holbrook, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Goldisc Recordings, Inc. (formerly Sonic Recording
Products) in Holbrook, Town of Islip, Suffolk County, New York, produced phonographic records from
January 1968 to June 1983. The facility occupies approximately 150,000 square feet on 7 acres of
commercially zoned property. Wastes generated at the site include large quantities of nickel plating wastes
and hydraulic oil, and lesser quantities of solvents. On several occasions, the Suffolk County Department
of Health discovered chemical wastes in storm drains, holding ponds, and an on-site dump located in the
recharge basin of an aquifer. In 1981, the county detected excessive levels of solvents, nickel, and oil in
sanitary and storm drains. An area between the two buildings on the site is paved, and there is a large
paved area on the southern portion of the site. Sanitary and storm drains, two above-ground tanks, and
some 55-gallon drums are located between the two buildings. A large holding pond is located on the north
side of the site.
 
A grassy wooded area surrounds the property. The site is relatively flat to the south and west, with variable
topography to the north and east. Residential and commercial areas are largely to the west and south,
and relatively undeveloped land lies adjacent to the site to the north and east. Many surface water bodies,
including lakes and basins that recharge ground water, are downgradient.
 
An estimated 130 wells within 3 miles of the site serve a minimum population of 71,000. A public
supply well is 1,000 feet downgradient (south) of the site. Other public and private supply wells are also
downgradient. Ground water is the only source of water supply in the area.
 
The State issued a number of Consent Orders to Goldisc between 1979 and 1981 for numerous violations
of Article 12 of the Suffolk County Sanitary Code and the State's Environmental Conservation Law.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : The present owner, First Holbrook Co., has cleaned the leaching pools and
installed monitoring wells. On December 20, 1985, the Electrosand Group, Inc. (present occupants of
the site) and the present owner entered into a Consent Order with the State to undertake a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
