NPL Site Narrative for Grand Street
Mercury
 
GRAND STREET MERCURY
Hoboken, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (December 1996) : The Grand Street Mercury site is located at 720 and 722-732
Grand Street, Hoboken, Hudson County, New Jersey. The site comprises two buildings, a former industrial
building converted into 16 residential/studio spaces with the area of each space between 2,600 and
3,500 square feet and a four story townhouse also slated for residential renovation. The former industrial
building is approximately 100 feet by 150 feet, five stories high and is constructed of brick and masonry
with interior wooden structural and flooring systems. The townhouse is approximately 25 feet by 40 feet,
four stories high and also constructed of brick and masonry with wooden structural and flooring systems.
The surrounding area is a mix of residential/commercial and industrial properties. Hoboken High School is
located across the street to the northeast. More than 40,000 residents live in a one-half mile radius from
the site.
 
The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), on January 22, 1996, issued a Public
Health Advisory (PHA) that proclaimed "an imminent public health hazard is posed to residents of 722
Grand Street from past, current and potential future exposures via inhalation, direct dermal contact and
possible ingestion of metallic (elemental) mercury and mercury vapor." In addition, the PHA states "the
potential exists for mercury-contaminated possessions to be taken out of the building to continue to expose
residents of 722 Grand Street, contaminate other areas and expose other members of the public." The
PHA recommended that the residents be dissociated from mercury exposure in the 722 Grand Street
building.
 
Elevated concentrations of mercury have been detected in urine samples from residents. Adverse
health effects are associated with mercury levels greater than 20 µg/L (micrograms per liter). Mercury
concentrations ranged from 3 to 102 µg/L, and 20 samples had mercury concentrations equal to or greater
than 20 µg/L. The elevated concentrations of mercury detected in the residents may be associated with
subtle neurological changes and renal tubule effects. A removal action was conducted to dissociate the
affected residents from the metallic mercury and mercury vapors, prevent further off-site migration of
mercury, and to assess the extent of the mercury contamination. All residents had vacated the building by
January 11, 1996.
 
A mercury contamination study conducted at the site determined that mercury is widespread and
remediation for residential use is highly unlikely (mercury has been observed in the floor boards within
13 of 16 residential units and concentrations of mercury absorbed into interior brick within common areas
exceeds 9,100 parts per million). The site conditions are a result of a prolific production of mercury vapor
lamps and mercury connector switches, over 55 years of operation, and absorption of mercury into the
porous wood and brick comprising the building. The extent of mercury contamination coupled with an
extremely low residential standard makes cleanup highly unlikely.
 
Status (September 1997) : EPA completed a Focussed Feasibility Study in early July 1997, which included
a technical engineering evaluation and risk assessment, and released a Proposed Plan for remedial
action at the Site inviting public comment on the preferred remedy. In mid July 1997, EPA conducted a
public meeting to explain the remedial alternatives developed, provide rationale for selection of preferred
alternative and answer questions. The preferred remedial alternative includes permanent relocation for the
displaced site residents; demolition of the buildings; remediation of contaminated site soil; and groundwater
investigations. PRPs assumed building maintenance and site security activities from EPA in August 1997.
Dissociated residents of the Site remain in an ongoing EPA-administered temporary relocation program.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
