 
   
   
  
   
     
   
   
    
  
   
  
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** March 2010 
GRATIOT COUNTY GOLF COURSE St. Louis, Michigan Gratiot County 
Site Location: Gratiot County Golf Course site is located immediately eas t of the Hidden Oaks Golf Course on Monroe Road in St. Louis, Gratiot County, Michigan. Site History: From 1956 through 1970, a nearby chemical corporation disposed of industrial wastes in the area.  The waste liquids were destroyed weekly by burning in an open pit. The disposal area was proposed to the NPL in 1982. The owner excavated 68,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil.  These activities led to the deletion from the NPL in 1983.  In 2006, additional soil and ground water contamination was found and EPA and the State of Michigan decided to propose this area to the NPL. In 1972, a golf course was constructed around the boundaries of the former burn area.  The golf course is currently operating. Site Contamination/Contaminants: Approximately 345,606 square feet of contaminated soil and two fly ash piles remain on the former disposal site.  Elevated levels of benzene and 1,2-dichloroethane have been found in the soils and in the underlying ground water beneath the site. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Private residential wells and municipal water wells are located within a 4 mile radius.  The ground water supply of approximately 20,000 residents could potentially be affected.  Response Activities (to date): In 1983, the owner excavated 68,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil following the 1982 proposed listing of this site on the NPL. Need for NPL Listing: The State of Michigan referred the site to EPA because th e elevated volatile organics found in the soil and in the underlying ground water beneath the site may potentially affect private residential and municipal wells.  Other federal and state programs have been evaluated, but none are viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
