NPL Site Narrative for Gratiot County
Landfill
 
GRATIOT COUNTY LANDFILL
St. Louis, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Gratiot County Landfill covers 40 acres about 0.5 mile
southeast of St. Louis, Michigan. Prior to 1977, the Michigan Chemical Corp. (later purchased by Velsicol
Chemical Corp.) disposed of various plant wastes, including polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs), at the
landfill. In 1977, the State discovered that PBBs had been disposed of in the Gratiot Landfill and found
elevated levels of contaminants in shallow aquifers and in several nearby ponds. In addition, the State
learned that in at least one of possibly two places, the wastes were in direct contact with the immediately
underlying aquifer and that the potential existed for contamination of deeper aquifers supplying drinking
water for the region.
 
In August 1981, EPA awarded a Cooperative Agreement to Michigan using $386,000 made available
under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The agreement called for developing plans and
specifications for:
 
Containment to minimize migration of contaminants from the landfill. This includes regrading the surface
to maximize runoff, capping it to prevent infiltration, which would increase hydraulic pressure within the fill,
and construction of a slurry wall along the property boundary to contain contaminated ground water.
 
Construction of a dewatering and purge system to minimize migration and to prevent increases in hydraulic
pressure, which could damage the slurry wall.
 
Installation of an on-site treatment facility to decontaminate water used to purge the landfill.
 
This is the top priority site in Michigan.
 
Status (July 1983) : In November 1982, Velsicol agreed to a $38.5 million combined settlement for cleanup
of this site and two others in Michigan--the Gratiot County Golf Course and the Velsicol Plant in St. Louis.
About $13 million is for installing a clay cap, slurry wall, purge system, and transmission line for the purge
water (which will be used instead of the on-site treatment facility). Velsicol will supply the clay for the cap
and a deep well for injection of the purge water. EPA and the State are monitoring the construction, which
is scheduled to be completed in the fourth quarter of 1985. Under the Cooperative Agreement, the State is
preparing design documents for the transmission line. The work is scheduled to be completed in the third
quarter of 1983.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
