NPL Site Narrative for Green River
Disposal, Inc.
 
GREEN RIVER DISPOSAL, INC.
Maceo, Kentucky
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Green River Disposal, Inc., disposed of waste on Kelly
Cemetery Road in a rural area in east Daviess County near Maceo, Kentucky, during 1970-84. The 14-
acre site was used for landfilling and surface disposal. In January 1975, the site was permitted as a solid
waste landfill by the State of Kentucky. The permit expired in January 1988. The facility became inactive in
1984.
 
Waste from Kentucky industries was disposed of at the facility during 1978-84. According to records of the
Kentucky Department for Environmental Protection (KDEP), this waste was generated in part by Martin
Marietta Aluminum (now Commonwealth Aluminum) in Lewisport and by Green River Steel Corp., W.R.
Grace & Co., and General Electric Co., all in Owensboro. The waste included aluminum dross saltcake,
steel dust, phenolic resin, and paint waste, which were buried along with sanitary waste as part of the
facility's daily operations; 976 drums of waste were disposed of at the facility. In January 1985, Martin
Marietta and Grace removed 776 drums and transported them to a hazardous waste facility regulated
under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
In June 1985, a site investigation by KDEP revealed that two drums at the site contained chromium, lead,
cyanide, PCBs, arsenic, and barium, and that on-site private wells contained arsenic and barium. An
estimated 500 people obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
According to KDEP, surface water is threatened because wastes are inadequately covered and run-off
is uncontrolled. Blackford Creek, which is used for irrigation and recreational activities, is within 3 miles
downstream of the site.
 
The Green River Disposal, Inc., facility has a history of leachate outbreaks, underground fires, and
acceptance of unauthorized waste. In January 1983, the facility entered into an Agreed Order with KDEP.
The order was prepared as a result of permit violations and designed to deal with the environmental
problems existing at the landfill and to bring the facility into compliance with solid waste regulations. On
August 6, 1986, the State received a Notice of Bankruptcy from the company under Chapter 7 of the
Federal bankruptcy code.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA has issued a CERCLA Unilateral Administrative Order requiring
Commonwealth Aluminum, W.R. Grace & Co., General Electric Co., and Athlone Industries, Inc., all of
whom sent wastes to the site, to conduct a removal that in part encompasses restricting access to the site
and controlling leachate.
 
In May 1990, the four companies entered into a CERCLA Administrative Order on Consent with EPA.
Under the order, they will conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
