NPL Site Narrative for Griffiss Air Force
Base
 
GRIFFISS AIR FORCE BASE
Rome, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Griffiss Air Force Base occupies approximately 3,900 acres
in the Mohawk River Valley in Oneida County in central New York State, approximately 2 miles northeast
of Rome. The Mohawk River borders the main base on the west and south. Besides the main base, there
are 11 annexes used for base support and research and development. Activated in 1942, the base is
currently active with the 416th Bombardment Wing as host unit.
 
Hazardous wastes generated on the base are from support of the base mission and research and
development activities. The sources include industrial shops and laboratories. The various wastes
produced, including solvents and lead (from battery acids), were disposed of primarily in five landfills and
six dry wells covering about 110 acres.
 
The Air Force has detected phenols, ethylbenzene, and benzene in ground water and toluene in surface
water on the base. To date, no off-base wells have been closed due to contamination.
 
The base is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The Air Force has completed Phase I (records search) and is conducting Phase II
(verification and quantification).
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The Air Force has completed Phase II of the IRP and has also taken some
remedial measures in a number of on-base areas. EPA is reviewing all IRP recommendations and will
meet with the Air Force after completing the review to discuss the next phase of the IRP and negotiate an
Interagency Agreement.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
