NPL Site Narrative for Gulf State Utilities-
North Ryan Street
 
GULF STATE UTILITIES-NORTH RYAN STREET
Lake Charles, Louisiana
 
 
The Gulf States Utilities (GSU)-North Ryan Street site service yard is located at 303 North Ryan Street,
Lake Charles, Calcasieu Parish, Louisiana. The facility is situated on the east and west sides of North
Ryan Street near the intersection of North Ryan Street and River Road. GSU-North Ryan Street consists
of the west service yard (west of N. Ryan St.) and the east yard (east of N. Ryan St.) which total
approximately 19 acres.
 
The GSU-North Ryan Street facility has been in operation since 1926. Prior to 1926, the property was
occupied by the Lake Charles Gas Company. Coal gasification operations by the gas company resulted
in an unknown quantity of coal tar which was deposited in the adjacent wetland area. After the property
was purchased in 1926, GSU-North Ryan Street began to utilize the wetland area, then encompassing 6
acres, as a landfill for waste materials associated with the North Ryan Street facility's operation, such as
for the disposal of electrical poles and equipment, debris, appliance carcasses and miscellaneous items.
According to a former employee, used transformer oils and transformers were routinely dumped into the
landfill area. By 1980, the landfill was filled to capacity and covered with shells and soil. In at least one
area, the covering has subsided or been breached, and a tar seep covering approximately 64 square feet
is present. This area was identified in 1988 during an inspection conducted by the Louisiana Department of
Environmental Quality (LDEQ).
 
In September 1988, LDEQ issued a compliance order to GSU to conduct remedial activities at the GSU-
North Ryan Street site. Studies were conducted by GSU beginning in December 1988 and continuing
through October 1990. EPA conducted a site inspection (SI) at the site which included sampling activities
during the week of October 1, 1990 and the completion of an SI report in September of 1992. Samples
collected during SI field activities from Calcasieu River sediments revealed that contaminants attributable
to the GSU-North Ryan Street facility were being released to the Calcasieu River. Specifically, the
contaminants of concern to the surface water are polyaromatic hydrocarbons, copper, and lead.
 
The Calcasieu River, a recreational fishery, is within 60 feet directly north of the GSU-North Ryan Street
facility. Lake Charles and Prien Lake are within 15 miles of the site in the Calcasieu surface water system
and are also recreational fisheries. Wetland areas contiguous to surface water downstream of the site are
abundant. The City of Lake Charles and the City of Westlake operate public ground water drinking water
supply wells located within 4 miles of the GSU-North Ryan Street facility. According to EPA's SI sampling
conducted in October 1990, public drinking water supply wells located on the GSU-North Ryan Street
property and several located on adjacent property are not contaminated. The public drinking water supply
wells, both on site and the remainder that are within 4 miles of the site, draw water from the Chicot Aquifer
and are screened at depths of 500 feet below land surface and greater. The total estimated user population
for the portion of the City of Lake Charles drinking water supply system potentially affected by the site is
56,120 and for the Westlake system is 4,988.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
