NPL Site Narrative for H & H Inc., Burn Pit
 
H & H INC., BURN PIT
Farrington, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The H&H, Inc., Burn Pit covers approximately 1 acre 0.5
mile south of Farrington in Hanover County, Virginia. Residential developments are to the east and south.
The site is owned by the former owner of Haskell Chemical Co. It was used exclusively by the company
between 1960 and 1976 for disposal of solvents containing printing inks and paint-manufacturing wastes.
These materials were transported from the Haskell factory in Richmond to the site in drums, which were
emptied into the shallow unlined pit and burned. As required by Section 103(c) of CERCLA, Haskell
reported to EPA that it had delivered an estimated 750 cubic feet of waste materials to the site. Virginia
State Health Department files indicate that 1,000 empty drums were on-site prior to remedial activities
undertaken in 1982.
 
EPA sampling in March 1984 indicated that PCBs were being discharged off-site via surface drainage.
Also, toluene, xylene, and benzene were present in a monitoring well downgradient of the pit.
 
An estimated 2,400 people draw drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site. The nearest
well is about 1,000 feet away.
 
Surface waters within 3 miles downstream of the site are used for fishing. A fresh water wetland, as
designated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, is within 3,000 feet of the pit.
 
Access to the site is unrestricted. Thus, people and animals can come into direct contact with hazardous
substances at the site.
 
In response to enforcement actions by the Virginia State Department of Health, H&H, Inc., and Haskell
removed contaminated soil, took measures to control erosion and sedimentation, and installed monitoring
wells in 1982.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
