NPL Site Narrative for H.O.D. Landfill
 
H.O.D. LANDFILL
Antioch, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : H.O.D. Landfill covers 82 acres in Antioch, Lake County,
Illinois. Bulk liquid organic wastes and drummed wastes generated by Johnson Motors Division of
Outboard Marine Corp. were disposed of at the site in 1963-81, according to the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency (IEPA). One tanker dumped wastes containing moderately high levels (80 parts per
billion) of PCBs, according to State tests.
 
Monitoring wells downgradient of the site contain zinc, lead, and cadmium, according to tests conducted by
EPA. Antioch municipal wells serving 4,600 people are within 3 miles downgradient of the site. The nearest
well is 600 feet from the site.
 
The site is in a fresh water wetland. Sequoit Creek, which is adjacent to the site on the south and west,
flows into a series of lakes used for recreation.
 
In 1975, the State filed a suit against Waste Management, Inc., of Illinois, which had purchased the site
from H.O.D. Corp. The suit alleged violations involving operation of the landfill without a permit and cover
violations. The daily cover violations were dismissed because inspections were not performed at the end of
the working day, and intermediate cover violations occurred on only a small area of the site and had been
corrected.
 
In 1978, the State filed an enforcement notice against Waste Management for repeated violations of State
law regarding cover requirements at the landfill. Under a settlement reached in October 1984, Waste
Management agreed to stop the cover violations and pay a $5,000 fine.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : EPA conducted additional investigations at the landfill from November
1986 to September 1989 and is now conducting a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
