OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch 
Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2007 
HALACO ENGINEERING COMPANY Oxnard, California 
Ventura County 
à Site Location: 
The Halaco site (the “Site”) is located at 6200 Perkins Ro ad, Oxnard, California.  The Halaco facility abuts the Ormond Beach wetlands and is in close proximity to the Ormond Beach Lagoon, Ormond Beach, and the Pacific Ocean. 
´ Site History: 
The Site is an abandoned metal recycling facility bisected  by the Oxnard Industrial Drain (OID).  Scrap metal, including radioactive material, was processed at the smelter por tion of the facility located on the west side of the OID. Process wastes from the smelter, including wastewater, were deposited on the east side of the OID.  Halaco Engineering Company operated in Oxnard from 1965 until 2004.  The smelter portion of the Site allegedly was built upon an open dump operated by the City of Oxnard until 1962. 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Contamination sources have been found on the smelter propert y and the waste disposal parcel.  These sources include waste stored within process buildings, a surface impoundment and a large waste pile.  The smelter parcel has an estimated 5,000 cubic yards of process waste. A surface impoundment and waste disposal pile are located on the waste disposal parcel. The volume of waste in the surface impoundment is estim ated to be 450,000 cubic yards.  The waste pile contains an estimated 112,900 cubic yards of process waste.  Contamina tion found on site includes a combination of several metals and radionuclides significantly above background. These contam inants include aluminum, arsenic, barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, magnesium, manganese, nickel, silver, zinc, cesiu m-137, potassium-40, thorium-228, thorium-230, and thorium-232.  Contaminated soils and sedime nts containing one or more of the same metals and radionuclides have also been found on adjacent properties, in cluding a nature conservancy, wetlands, and a public beach. 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: 
Although a portion of the facility is fen ced, there are signs of trespass and vandalism. Commercial and sport fishing occur near the adjacent Ormond Beach area.  Fish tissue samples co llected near the Site contain elevated levels of arsenic. The Ormond Beach wetland is one of the few large-scale wetla nds that remain along California’s Southern Coast. These coastal wetlands are home to several endangered or threat ened species, including the western snowy plover and the California least tern. 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
Interim measures have been taken to improve site secu rity, remove drums and other containers of hazardous substances, excavate waste material from the wetland area, and stabilize on-site hazardous substances. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
