NPL Site Narrative for Hanford 300-Area
(USDOE)
 
HANFORD 300-AREA (USDOE)
Benton County, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Hanford 300-Area is adjacent to the Columbia River in the
southern section of the 570-square-mile Hanford Site approximately 3 miles north of the City of Richland,
Benton County, Washington. Since 1943, Hanford has been the scene of Federal nuclear activities,
primarily production of nuclear materials for national defense.
 
The U.S. Department of Energy (USDOE) fabricates nuclear reactor fuel in the 300-Area, which
contains 14 disposal locations. The disposal locations and plumes of contaminated ground water cover
approximately 5 square miles.
 
An estimated 27 million cubic yards of solid and dilute liquid wastes comprised of radioactive, mixed,
and hazardous constituents were disposed of in ponds, trenches, and landfills in the 300-Area. USDOE
detected uranium in area springs, wells, and the Columbia River at levels significantly above background.
Almost 70,000 people use ground water and surface water for drinking within 3 miles of the 300-Area.
 
EPA, USDOE, and the Washington Department of Ecology (WDOE) are jointly developing an action plan
that will include the work needed to address this area under the Superfund program, as well as other work
needed to meet permitting, corrective action, and compliance requirements of Subtitle C of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : On May 15, 1989, EPA, USDOE, and WDOE signed a comprehensive
agreement for the cleanup of the entire Hanford Site, including the area covered in this NPL site. This
Federal Facility Agreement and State Consent Order contains schedules for remedial investigations and
feasibility studies for Superfund work at the Hanford Site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
