NPL Site Narrative for Hanlin-Allied-Olin
 
HANLIN-ALLIED-OLIN
Moundsville, West Virginia
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 23, 1999) : The Hanlin-Allied-Olin site is an inactive chemical manufacturing
plant located 2.5 miles south of Moundsville, Marshall County, West Virginia. The site is currently owned by
three parties: Hanlin/LCP Chemicals, Allied Chemical Corporation, and Olin Corporation. The site includes
a 135-acre North Plant owned by Allied and Olin, and a 225-acre South Plant owned by Hanlin. Two areas
included in the 360 acres are not considered part of the NPL site because they are being addressed under
other authorities. One of these areas, the "Brownfields" portion, is being addressed through the West
Virginia Department of Environmental Protection's Voluntary Remediation and Redevelopment Program.
The second area, the "Engineering Evaluation/Cost Analysis (EE/CA)" or "Olin Process Area" portion,
is being addressed through EPA's Removal Program. The NPL site therefore includes the entire Hanlin-
Allied-Olin property less these two areas. Ground water beneath the entire 360-acre Hanlin-Allied-Olin
property will be addressed as part of the NPL site, as will any off-site migration of contamination via ground
water, surface water or air migration.
 
The site (i.e., the entire 360-acre property) is bordered by the Ohio River to the north and west, West
Virginia Route 2 to the east, and a golf course to the south. Access is restricted by the river and by a chain
link fence and security guard. The site is directly underlain by an unconsolidated alluvial aquifer. The
alluvial aquifer that underlies the site supplies drinking water to about 2,900 people.
 
Operation on the northern portion of the site included the manufacture of toluene diisocyanate (TDI),
methylene dianiline, and hydrochloric acid, and included waste disposal areas on both North and South
plants.
 
Operations on the southern portion of the site included the production of chlorine and sodium hydroxide by
electrolytic mercury decomposition in mercury cells in saltbrine and chloromethane by reacting methanol
with anhydrous hydrochloric acid.
 
Sources on the site include surface impoundments, landfills, waste piles, container storage areas,
contaminated soil, and outfalls. Hazardous substances contained in the five evaluated waste
sources include mercury, methylene chloride, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, tetrachoroethene,
trichloroethylenene, and 1,1,2-trichloroethane. All of these substances, as well as other related
substances, have been detected in ground water in the alluvial aquifer. Mercury, chloroform, and carbon
tetrachloride have been released to the Ohio River through National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Outfall 001 at concentrations exceeding permit limitations or through spills to Outfall
001. A 1981 State Consent Decree ordered Allied to pump onsite wells on the northern (now Allied and
Olin) and southern (now Hanlin) properties for 20 and 14 years, respectively, or to otherwise prevent the
offsite migration of contaminants in the ground water. The site is not eligible for RCRA Corrective Action for
various reasons relating to ownership, permit dates, and financial solvency.
 
Status (July 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
