NPL Site Narrative for Hart Creosoting
Company
 
HART CREOSOTING COMPANY
Jasper, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 23, 1999) : The Hart Creosoting Company site encompasses approximately
8.8 acres located along the west side of State Highway 96 in the southwest portion of the City of Jasper,
Jasper County, in southeast Texas. The Hart Creosoting Company site is an inactive former wood treating
facility that operated from 1958 to 1993. During its history, a pole peeling plant also operated at the facility
from 1968 to 1978 and pipe threading operations were conducted at the facility from 1982 to 1985.
 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Texas Natural Resource Conservation
Commission (TNRCC) conducted numerous investigations of the Hart Creosoting Company site both
during the facility's operations and after its closure. In March 1994, 10 months after the facility ceased
wood treating operations, an expanded site inspection (ESI) of the facility was conducted. Soil samples
taken during the ESI showed that soils throughout the facility processing area were contaminated with
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are hazardous substances associated with the wood
treating industry. Subsequently, ground water samples collected around the site and sediment samples
collected from an intermittent creek draining the site and the nearby Big Walnut Run Creek were found to
contain elevated concentrations of the same hazardous substances found in the soil on site.
 
The contaminated ground water is located in an aquifer that is used as a primary source of drinking water
for the City and County of Jasper. Thirty-nine private wells and two public water supply wells are located
within four miles of the site. No public or private ground water wells are known to be impacted at this time.
The area of Big Walnut Run Creek where contamination has been found is used by area residents for
swimming and subsistence fishing. While contamination has been detected in both the ground water and
the surface water near the site, only the surface water contamination is reflected in the Hazard Ranking
System score developed for the site.
 
Status (July 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
