NPL Site Narrative for Hechimovich
Sanitary Landfill
 
HECHIMOVICH SANITARY LANDFILL
Williamstown, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Hechimovich Sanitary Landfill covers 20 acres in
Williamstown, Dodge County, Wisconsin. In 1985, the name was changed to Land and Gas Reclamation.
The site is in a rural agricultural area approximately 2 miles south of Mayville. Operations started in 1970
when the owner received a license from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) to
accept solid waste. During the mid-1970s, the site was licensed by WDNR to accept hazardous waste.
 
The owner says he placed hazardous waste, including paint sludges, cutting oils containing lead and
chromium, and spent organic solvents, in unlined pits during 1972-80. The pits were closed in 1980 as
required by WDNR. The wastes and contaminated soils from the pits were placed into the landfill.
 
In August 1984, EPA detected ethylbenzene and xylene in two wells downgradient of the site. An
estimated 5,000 people obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Part of the site is in a wetland. The Hidden Marsh Wildlife Area is approximately 2.5 miles to the west.
Surface waters in the area are used for recreational activities.
 
Solid waste has been deposited beyond areas previously approved by WDNR, in violation of the landfill's
permit. A new, separate sanitary landfill has been proposed to the north of the operating site. The new
landfill is proceeding through the State approval process.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
