NPL Site Narrative for Helena Chemical
Co. (Tampa Plant)
 
HELENA CHEMICAL CO. (TAMPA PLANT)
Tampa, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 7, 1992) : Helena Chemical Co. operates on an 8-acre site at the
intersection of Orient Road and 14th Avenue in a primarily industrial area of Tampa, Hillsborough County,
Florida. Helena, which is owned by Marubeni America Corp., acquired the property from Flag Sulphur, a
manufacturer of sulfates. Since 1981, the company has used the site to store, repackage, and distribute
liquid pesticides; small quantities of liquid pesticides are manufactured on a demand basis.
 
From 1967 until 1981, when manufacturing operations were shifted to another Helena facility, the Tampa
plant received bulk shipments of various agricultural chemicals that were then formulated into liquid
fertilizers and nutritional products. Raw materials used to formulate the pesticides included liquid zinc,
liquid manganese, toluene, and xylene. Wastes generated included liquid solvent runoff containing xylene,
toluene, endrin, dieldrin, chlorobenzilate, zinc, and manganese. Until 1972, liquid solvent runoff entered a
small holding pond. From 1974 to 1981, Helena treated and neutralized liquid pesticide waste in a system
involving three interconnected underground tanks. Since at least 1976, the facility has used a retention
pond to contain storm-water runoff, and possibly to contain spillage from the liquid processing plant.
 
EPA investigations conducted during 1989 and 1990 detected pesticides and pesticide constituents,
including 4,4'-DDD, toluene, dieldrin, manganese, and zinc, in on-site and off-site ground water and soil.
An estimated 6,300 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 4 miles of the site, the
nearest a private well 0.25 mile northwest of the site.
 
Status (October 1992) : In June 1992, EPA issued a "Special Notice Letter" inviting Helena to enter into
formal negotiations for an Administrative Order on Consent (AOC). The negotiations were held in July
1992. Helena and EPA are expected to sign the AOC shortly. The AOC will call for Helena to acquire an
environmental consultant to conduct a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study to determine the type and
extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
