 
 OSWER/ OS RTI 
Washi ngton,  DC 20460  
 
                                NATIONAL PR IORITIES LIST (NPL)                                 
***Final  Sit e***                                                                                                                                         Decemb er 2013  
HEM PHILL ROAD TCE  Ga stonia, North Carolina 
Gaston Count y 
 
 Site Location:  
The Hemphill Road  TCE site consists of a Northwe st (NW) p arcel and  a South east  (SE) par cel along Hemphill Roa d 
near the int ersection of Forbes Road in South Gastonia,  North Carolina,  and an associated ground water conta min ation 
plume.  
 
 Site History: 
During the 1950s, the site owner reported ly used  the SE p arcel to recyc le sev eral thousand  chemi cal drums. The owne r 
reported ly dumped  drum residues onto the grou nd, then rinsed,  burn ed and  fla ttened the d rums for sa le as scrap  metal. 
The NW  parcel was purch ased in 1973 and the SE p arcel in 1988 and  was op erated  as Gastonia In dust rial Tru ck. 
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
Trichloro ethene (TCE)-conta min ated ground  water was discov ered  in 1988 in a p rivate drinking water we ll near the 
site.  Follow-up  investigation in 1989 revealed TCE conta min ation in an  adj acent residence to the no rth on Hemphi ll 
Road, as we ll as in the Gastonia Industrial Tru ck’s fac ility production we ll. In 1999  TCE was found  in the n earby 
Kensington Estates co mmunity we ll. Sourc e investigations on  both the NW  and  SE p rop erties rev ealed only trac e 
levels of  TCE in soils on  the SE parcel, indi cating that a signifi cant sou rce of TCE may no longer remain in the soils. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Private drinking water we lls on  Hemphill Ro ad and  the Kensington Estates community d rinking water we lls are 
conta min ated  with TCE and  are located as far as ¼  mi le to the we st of the SE p arcel on Hemphill Ro ad. Anoth er 
conta min ated  community we ll, We sley Acre s, is located be tween ¼ and  ½ mile  to the south. The und erlying geol ogy 
of the area is fr actu red b edrock and conta min ation is likely migrating via bed rock fractu res. 
 
 Respon se Activities (to date):  
Following the disco very of conta mination, the Kensington Estates we ll was tak en offline and hooked up to the Am y 
Acres community we ll. At the time  of shutdown, the Kensington Estates we ll served 100 p eople. The own ers of the 
two  private residen ces pl aced f ilter s on their wells,  but the filt ers weren ’t mainta ined and  one was d etermin ed to be not 
working in 2012. One additional we ll was found  conta min ated. In May 2012, the EPA installed whole house filter 
systems on the three private drinking water wells. 
 
 Need for NPL Listi ng:  
The sta te of North Carolina referred  the site to the EPA to allow for a co mp rehensive cl eanup to address a ll the huma n 
health  and environme ntal risks posed by the site.  Oth er federal and  state cleanup prog rams were eva luated,  but are not 
viable at this t ime. The EPA rece ived a letter of suppo rt from the state for placing this site on the NPL. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[The descrip tion of the s ite (releas e) is based on informatio n ava ilable at the time the site was eval uated wi th the HRS. The descrip tion ma y 
chang e as add itional information is gather ed on the s ources  and extent of c ontamination. See 56 FR 5600 , Febr uary 11, 1991 , or s ubsequent 
FR notices.]  
 
For mo re informa tion about the hazardous s ubstances iden tified in this na rrative summary, incl uding ge neral informa tion regarding the effec ts of ex posure to 
these substances on human h ealth, pl ease  see the A gency for Tox ic Sub stances and Disease  Reg istry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATS DR  ToxFA Qs can be f ound on 
the Internet a t  http://www.a tsdr.cdc.gov /toxfaqs/i ndex.asp or by tele phone at 1- 888- 42-ATS DR  or 1- 888- 422-8 737.  
