OLEM/OSRTI  Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** September 2020 
HENRYETTA IRON AND METAL  Henryetta, Oklahoma  
Okmulgee County  
Site Location:Henryetta Iron and Metal is a scrap-metal yard on the west side of Henryetta in southern Okmulgee County, Oklahoma. 
 Site History: 
Henryetta Iron and Metal (HIM) operations consisted of acquiring an assortment of metal-containing objects from various 
sources for recycling. The property had been used as a metal salvage yard since the 1930s. Other businesses that have 
occupied the property include a blacksmith, motor freight lines, a welding facility, and a pipe and supply company. 
Electrical transformer s containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were reportedly recycled on-site beginning in the 
1950s. The facility is no longer active, but scrap piles remain on-s ite. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminant s: 
The soil, groundwater and downstream sediments are contaminated with PCBs, metals, and polycyclic aromat ic hydrocarbons 
(PAHs). 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
On-site soils are heavily contaminated with PCBs, metals and PAHs. The site is not fenced and is accessible to nearby residents. Residential yards located to the south and downgradient of the site have concentrations of PCBs, metals and PAHs above Regional Screening Levels (RSLs). An unnamed creek downstream of the facility is contaminated with PCBs from the site. Local children play in the creek. Groundwater underlying the facility is contaminated with metals and PCBs. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
In November 2018, the EPA removed soil from three residential homes and city right-of-way. A berm was constructed 
to redirect surface water flow away from the residential homes already remediated. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The
 state of Oklahoma referred the site to the EPA because no other viable options for long -term r
 emediation were available. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Oklahoma.
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narr ati
 ve summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
