NPL Site Narrative for Hi-Mill
Manufacturing Co.
 
HI-MILL MANUFACTURING CO.
Highland, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Hi Mill Manufacturing Co. has fabricated tubular aluminum,
copper, and brass parts on a 2.5-acre site in Highland, Oakland County, Michigan, since 1946. Prior to
1981, rinse water from dipping operations was discharged to an on-site unlined lagoon adjacent to a marsh
connected to Waterbury Lake, which is used for recreational activities. Rinse water has also been sprayed
into the air as a disposal method. Currently, more of the rinse water is recycled. The remaining water is
neutralized with caustic soda, stored in underground tanks, and then transported off-site.
 
In 1982, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources detected copper in wells downgradient of the site.
Heavy metals also contaminated marsh sediments and water in the adjacent Highland Recreation Area. An
estimated 13,600 people obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
In November 1983, the company removed sludge and contaminated soil from the lagoon and transported
them to a hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act. Water from the pond was treated on-site. The excavation reportedly went down 1 foot into clean clay,
and sand was used to fill in the hole.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In October 1988, EPA and Hi Mill signed an Administrative Order on Consent
under which Hi Mill will conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. Field work began in November
1989.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
