OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** March 2008 
HIDDEN LANE LANDFILL Sterling, Virginia Loudoun County 
àSite Location: The Hidden Lane Landfill is located in a mixed residen tial and commercial area of Sterling, Loudoun County, Virginia, approximately ¾ mile north of Route 7.     ´Site History: From 1971 through 1984, a landfill was operated at this location.  The landfill accepted solid municipal waste and construction debris. The 25 acre landfill was covered with a clay cap and is currently vacant land. rSite Contamination/Contaminants: The contaminants are volatile organic compounds, including trichloroethene (TCE), 1,1,1-tricholorethane and 1,2­dichloroethene. Concentrations of TCE detected in nine  drinking water wells located near the landfill were above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level for TCE in drinking water.   vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Ground water underlying the Hidden Lane Landfill and adjacent proper ties is contaminated with TCE.  TCE migrated from the landfill to residential wells located within 1 mile of the landfill.  There is the potential for TCE to vaporize and enter homes located within the area of the TCE-contaminated ground water.  3Response Activities (to date): The Virginia Department of Environmental Quality has installed treatment systems on 22 residential wells, currently known to be contaminated with TCE.  The Loudoun County Depa rtment of Health is strongly advising other residents located in the vicinity to install whole-house water treatment systems.       }Need for NPL Listing: The State of Virginia referred the site to EPA, because th e state could no longer maintain or provide additional whole- house treatment systems to area residents.  Other federal a nd state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time, because they could not address the residential drinking water wells contaminated by TCE and the TCE contaminated ground water plume.  EPA received letters of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state, Broad Run Farms Civic Association, and citizens of Sterling, Virginia.   
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
