NPL Site Narrative for Higgins Disposal
 
HIGGINS DISPOSAL
Franklin Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Higgins Disposal Site covers 38 acres at 121 Laurel
Avenue in a rural area north of Kingston, Somerset County, New Jersey. For an unknown number of years,
the owner operated an unpermitted landfill and an unpermitted transfer station on the site. The owner of
this business owns Higgins Farm, which is also proposed for the NPL at this time.
 
In 1981, as required by CERCLA Section 103(c), FMC Corp. reported to EPA that in 1974 its Princeton
plant had sent chemical waste containing heavy metals, organic solvents, and pesticides to the site. In
October 1982, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) issued an Administrative
Order under the State's Solid Waste Management Act requiring Higgins Disposal to stop accepting and
disposing of solid waste and remove waste already at the facility.
 
On June 26, 1986, NJDEP sampled soil and water on the property. Analysis identified PCBs (Aroclor
1248), tetrachloroethylene, 1,2-dichlorobenzene, and bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate in on-site soil. Aroclor
1248 was also detected in an on-site pond downgradient of the landfill. When full, the pond spills into Dirty
Brook, which discharges into the Delaware/Raritan Canal. The canal is used for boating and fishing. A
fresh water wetland is 300 feet from the site.
 
Soils on the site are permeable and ground water shallow, conditions that facilitate movement of
contaminants into ground water. An estimated 2,000 people depend on private wells within 3 miles of the
site as their sole source of drinking water. NJDEP considers Higgins Disposal a possible source of local
well contamination.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA is starting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
