   
   
     
          
    
 
    
              
     
        
    
           
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** July 2017  
HIGHWAY 18 GROUND WATER Kermit, Texas 
Winkler County 
Site Location:
The Highway 18 Ground Water site is a contaminated ground water plume located in K ermit, Texas.  
Site History: 
The site consists of a ground water plume of chlorinated solvents from an unknown source (or sources) that released volatile organic compounds (VOCs) into the Santa Rosa Aquifer. The Kermit Public Water Supply (PWS) first detected trichloroethene (TCE) in its system in 1994; tetrachloroethene (PCE) was first detected in 2000. The plume is approximately 1.0 miles long and 1.5 miles wide. Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Ground water is contaminated with PCE and TCE. These contaminants were found at concent rations g reater than 
the Safe Drinking Water Act’s Maximum Con taminant Levels (MCLs) within the Santa Rosa Aquifer . 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: 
T
he Kermit PWS draws its municipal supply from the Santa Rosa Aquifer. Currently seven of the city’s nine wells contain either TCE or PCE. Two of the wells contain PCE above health based limits. The city of Kermit supplies water to 5,714 individuals on 2,465 connections. Response Activities (to date): 
The water system treats and blends water prior to distribution to ensure that drinking water standards are met. No other 
response actions have been taken. 
 Need for NPL List ing: 
T
he Texas Commission on Environmental Quality referred the site to the EPA due to chlorinated solvents in ground water used for drinking. Without identification and investigation of the source of ground water contamination and remediation of the contaminated ground water plume additional public and private wells may be threatened. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter in support of proposing to add this site to the NPL from the state of Texas. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may 
change as
 additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent 
FR n
otices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure 
to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found 
on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp o r by telephone at 1-8 00-C DC-I NFO or 1-8 00 -232-4 636. 
