OLEM/OSRTI  Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***NPL Site***                        September 2020 
HIGHWAY  100  AND  COUNTY  ROAD  3 
GROUNDWATER PLUME  St. Louis Park and Edina, Minnesota  
Hennepin County   
Site Location:The Highway 100 and County Road 3 Groundwater Plume site consists of a groundwater plume contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs). The extent of the groundwater plume has not been determined but appears to have contaminated municipal and monitoring wells in the cities of St. Louis Park and Edina.  Site History: In 2004, environmental investigation work was initiated when vinyl chloride was detected in an Edina municipal well. Bet
ween 2004 and 2013, several multi-phase investigations were conducted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA), which found a large chlorinated VOC plume contaminating multiple aquifers. Several potential sources exist, but MPCA has been unable to identify a source(s) to which the VOC contamination in the deeper aquifers could be definitively attributed.  Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
The groundwater plume consists of VOCs, including trichloroethene (TCE), tetrachloroethene  (PCE), cis-
dicholoroethylene (cis-DCE) and vinyl chloride. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
The drinking w
ater of the approximately 48,000 people served by the St. Louis Park municipal well field and the 50,000 people served by the Edina well field may be threatened by the contamination. Prior to treatment, several of the drinking water wells were found to contain VOC concentrations exceeding federal and/or state regulatory standards. However, all water is treated prior to distribution to  customers.  Response Activities (to date):  
Following a referral from MPCA, in 2008 and 2009 EPA’s Emergency Response program installed vapor mitigation systems at approximately 40 residential and commercial properties with vapor intrusion risks.  The city of Edina and the MPCA constructed a centralized water-treatment facility that processes all the water produced from contaminated Edina wells. The MPCA also designed, and the city of St. Louis Park has completed, construction of a water treatment system at one of St. Louis Parks contaminated municipal supply wells prior to its return to use in 2018. As a result, drinking water provided by both the cities of Edina and St. Louis Park currently are in compliance with all MCLs as established in the Safe Drinking Water  Act.  Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Minnesota referred the site to the EPA due to the potential impacts, size, scope and complexity of the site and the need for further investigation and clean-up. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Minnesota.
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] For more information about the hazardous substances identifi ed
  in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
