NPL Site Narrative for Hill Air Force Base
 
HILL AIR FORCE BASE
Ogden, Utah
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Hill Air Force Base (AFB) covers 6,666 acres approximately
5 miles south of Ogden in Davis and Weber Counties, Utah. In 1920, the western portion of the base was
activated as Ogden Arsenal, an Army ordnance depot. Hill AFB was commissioned in late 1940, serving as
an aircraft rehabilitation center and storage depot for aircraft parts during World War II.
 
There are 10 areas of known hazardous waste disposal at Hill AFB. The 10, which cover a total of 54
acres, are: 3 landfills, 3 chemical disposal pits, 1 evaporation pond, 1 area of unlined beds for drying
sludge from waste water treatment plants, and 2 fire training areas. Landfill #1 operated as a solid waste
dump and may have received waste oils and solvents, many hazardous. The largest accumulation of
hazardous waste is believed to be at Landfill #3, which accepted drums of chemicals, industrial sludges,
solvent cleaning bottoms, and waste solvents. Landfill #4 received small quantities of sulfuric acid, chromic
acid, methyl ethyl ketone, and treatment plant sludges, along with municipal wastes. Chemical Disposal
Pits #1 and #2 received liquid chemicals. Pit #3 received trichloroethylene and associated sludges. Berman
Pond was used for evaporation of waste from electroplating and other industrial operations.
 
In addition, Hill AFB deposited heavy metals and various solutions at Landfill #5 on the Utah Test and
Training Range. The Air Force is monitoring this area in accordance with the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA).
 
The State detected hazardous organic substances in seepage water on the slope adjacent to the
northwestern perimeter of Hill AFB Landfills #3 and 4.
 
Hill AFB is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Air Force has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary survey) is
underway. Hill AFB has completed initial remedial measures at Landfill #4 and started remedial action at
Landfill #3 and Berman Pond. Associated areas are also being studied.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Additional Phase II studies began during the summer of 1985. A Technical Review
Committee is being formed to ensure that future actions meet CERCLA requirements. Work is starting to
cap Landfills #3 and 4 and Chemical Pits #1 and 2. Hill AFB signed an Interagency Agreement with EPA
and the State on February 14, 1986. The agreement covers all site activities.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of RCRA. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore,
this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
