NPL Site Narrative for Himco Dump
 
HIMCO DUMP
Elkhart, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Himco Dump covers approximately 40 acres at County
Road 10 and the Napanee Extension, located partially in the corporate limits of the city of Elkhart and
partially in the unincorporated part of Elkhart County, Indiana. The privately owned site operated between
1960 and September 1976. Parts of a nonmarshy area were excavated to a depth of 10 to 20 feet, and,
together with a marshy area, were filled with general refuse and medical and pharmaceutical wastes. Other
industrial wastes may also have been landfilled, according to the company and a report prepared by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Elkhart Water Works. The City of Elkhart issued an
operating permit for that portion of the landfill inside the city limits.
 
During an inspection in July 1984, EPA observed several streams of leachate. The landfill was about 15
feet above the original ground level at the center, sloping to 5 feet at the edges. Much of the landfill was
covered with sand. Isolated spots of stressed vegetation were visible. Sulfur odors were strong.
 
EPA detected selenium, arsenic, copper, lead, mercury, zinc, manganese, and other metals in monitoring
wells downgradient of the site. The results corroborated analyses of residential wells conducted in 1974 by
the State, which showed high manganese levels.
 
In 1974, the State Health Commissioner advised the site owner to drill deep wells to replace six
contaminated shallow residential wells. In 1975, the owner signed a Consent Agreement (adopted by the
Stream Pollution Control Board) that resulted in the closing of the dump in September 1976.
 
The dump is located above a continuous portion of the shallow aquifer system that is the sole source of
drinking water for the community. A conservative estimate is that wells within 3 miles of the site serving
20,000 people may be affected.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In early 1989, EPA discussed the possibility of having Himco Waste Away,
Inc. (a transporter and former operator of the site) and Miles Laboratories (a generator and one of the
current owners of the site) conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS). New information
received during these discussions identified an additional 37 generators representing a broad range of
manufacturing firms that had sent wastes to the site.
 
In September 1989, EPA began the RI/FS, which will determine the type and extent of contamination at the
site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
