NPL Site Narrative for Hipps Road Landfill
 
HIPPS ROAD LANDFILL
Duval County, Florida
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : The Hipps Road Landfill occupies 9 acres in the Jacksonville
Heights area of Duval County, Florida. In 1983, the State found that a number of residential wells near the
abandoned site were contaminated with organics, including chlorinated compounds. The city advised the
owners not to drink the water. Because of the danger of more widespread contamination in the area, the
U.S. Geological Survey, the State, the St. John's Water Management District, and the City of Jacksonville
started a study to evaluate the problem. Studies made by the State in May 1983 indicate that about 30 of
the 100 or so residential wells in the area may be affected by the leachate plume from the landfill. The City
Water Department is in the process of providing alternate water supplies to the affected area.
 
Status (June 1984) : In December 1983, EPA completed a search for parties potentially responsible for
wastes associated with the site. The State conducted additional well tests and expects the results to
confirm the original results. The City Water Department has installed lines to the affected homes and has
completed the hookups to homeowners in the area. The City Legislature adopted special rules to defer
some of the cost of the hookups and has funded further off-site water sampling. In February 1984, the
State requested that EPA take the lead in a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. In early June 1984,
EPA sent letters to potentially responsible parties notifying them of possible legal action under CERCLA.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
