 OLEM/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May 2018 
HOCKESSIN GROUNDWATER Hockessin, Delaware New Castle County 
  Site Location: The Hockessin Groundwater site is located in the village of Hockessin in a mixed commercial and residential area .   Site History: The site consists of a ground water plume containing hazardous substances. There are two dry cleaners in the vicinity where historical and current operations appear to have contributed to the ground water contamination. There may be other sources of contamination within the area as well. The Artesian Water Authority uses ground water wells as the primary source of drinking water in this area. The state of Delaware began their investigation into potential sources when the water authority had reported contaminants in the untreated water in 2002.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: Ground water is contaminated with the solvent tetrachloroethene  (PCE) which is commonly used in commercial and industrial operations such as dry cleaning and metal degreasing.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : There are three municipal wells, three residential wells and one irrigation well tha t are contaminated above EPA’s Maximum Contaminant Levels for drinking water within the plume area. Ground water is the main source of drinking water in the Hockessin area. The Artesian Water Authority serves approximately 184,000 people of which 10,500 could be directly affected from drinking contaminated water from this wellfield. The water authority treats the contaminated ground water, and the final processed drinking water meets all regulatory standards.   Response Activities (to date): The municipal wells are continually monitored by the water authority and are blended and treated to ensure that the drinking water that is distributed to the residents meets the regulatory standards. The state installed and maintains carbon filtration systems on the three residential wells. In the fall of 2016, the EPA began a vapor intrusion assessment of shallow soils and residences above the ground water plume, and thus far, has seen a low impact to indoor air.   Need for NPL Listing: The state of Delaware referred the site to the EPA to assist in fully characterizing the extent and impact of the ground water contamination. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time due to the complexity of the geology at the site. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Delaware. The village of Hockessin also supports the listing. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notic es]  For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR ) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
 
