       
   
   
  
      
         
  
   
     
                   
        
               
        
     
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2012 
HOLCOMB CREOSOTE CO Yadkinville, North Carolina 
Yadkin County 
Site Location: Holcomb Creosote Co is located in Yadkinville, Yadkin County, North Carolina, situated between Highway 601 and a tributary of Deep Creek, just northwest of Dobbins Pond.     Site History: Holcomb Creosote Co was a creosote wood treating facility. It began operations in the 1950s and closed in February 2009. Until 1983, creosote wastes were stored in an 80,000- gallon capacity unlined surface impoundment in the southern portion of the site west of the Deep Creek tributary. A 0.75- acre land treatment unit, also unlined, was constructed east of the tributary and filled with approximately 250 cubic yards of sludge excavated from the surface impoundment. In 2009, underground and above -ground tanks, numerous 55-gallon drums (containing creosote sludge, diesel fuel and oil) and an open concrete pit containing creosote sludge and wastewater treatment sludge remained onsite. Visible creosote contamination of soils and sediments across the unfenced 3 -acre property was observed. The EPA completed a Superfund emergency removal action in early 2011 to address the immediate threats posed by the site. Site Contamination/Contaminants: Creosote contains carcinogenic polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), specifically, benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene, chrysene, dibenzo(a,h)anthracene and indeno(1,2,3 -cd)pyrene. Heavy metals (arsenic, beryllium, cadmium, copper, lead, mercury and zinc) are present at elevated levels .   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : Surface and subsurface soils and ground water are contaminated with creosote -related PAHs. Onsite soils are contaminated with the heavy metal, mercury. Both ground water and contaminated sediments are leaching into and discharging to the surface water. Sediments in the tributary wetlands and Deep Creek wetlands, which drain into Dobbins Pond, are contaminated with PAHs and heavy metals. Dobbins Pond is a recreational pond fished by surrounding residents and other members of the community. The EPA detected elevated heavy metals, but not PAHs, in the bank sediments of Dobbins Pond. The PAHs and heavy metals found in the upgradient wetlands are a potential threat to fish and members of the community who eat the fish.  Response Activities (to date): The EPA completed a Superfund emergency removal action in 2011. Significant amounts of onsite waste material, including drums, tanks, sludge and contaminated soil, have been removed from the site. However, the EPA will be unable to address contaminated ground water, subsurface soils and sediments without listing the site on the NPL. Need for NPL Listing: The state of North Carolina referred the site to the EPA becaus e the facility was abandoned and significant amounts of creosote wastes remained unsecured. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable. The state of North Carolina sent a letter of support for placing Holcomb Creosote Co on the NPL .  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
