NPL Site Narrative for Homestead Air
Force Base
 
HOMESTEAD AIR FORCE BASE
Homestead, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : Homestead Air Force Base is in Dade County, approximately 25
miles southwest of Miami and 7 miles east of Homestead, Florida. The facility encompasses 2,916 acres
with additional easements of 429 acres. The area around the base is mostly agricultural and residential.
The base has jurisdiction over several remote annexes, but there is little evidence that hazardous
substances have been disposed of at those locations.
 
The base was activated in September 1942 and initially was operated by the Army Air Transport
Command. After extensive hurricane damage in 1945, the base was turned over to Dade County, which
used it for small commercial and industrial operations. In 1953, the Air Force acquired the base and rebuilt
it.
 
Wastes have been disposed of on-site since the facility's inception. A landfill was operated in the 1940s,
but little is known about this operation. During Dade County's ownership, electroplating operations were
conducted on the site, and plating wastes containing heavy metals and cyanides were allegedly disposed
of directly on the ground.
 
After the Air Force assumed control in 1953, hazardous substances were disposed of in Fire Training Area
3, which was unlined and had no system to collect residual fluids, and the Residual Pesticide Disposal
Area. Several spills also occurred, including one of PCBs from an electrical transformer.
 
Homestead Air Force Base is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established
in 1978. Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up
contamination from hazardous materials. IRP studies have detected high concentrations of ethyl ether in
ground water throughout and downgradient of Fire Training Area 3. Approximately 5,500 gallons of ethyl
ether were disposed of in the area in January 1984. The Biscayne Aquifer, which underlies the site, has
been designated by EPA as a sole source aquifer under the Safe Drinking Water Act. An estimated 16,600
people obtain drinking water from wells into the aquifer within 3 miles of the hazardous substances on the
base.
 
The base is surrounded by a perimeter canal, which discharges into Military Canal and ultimately into
Biscayne Bay 2 miles to the west.
 
The Air Force plans further investigations of releases of hazardous substances and their migration under
the IRP and a permit issued under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and
incorporating corrective action.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA, the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation, and the Air Force
are negotiating an Interagency Agreement under CERCLA Section 120 to cover response activities at the
base.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
