NPL Site Narrative for Hooker (S-Area)
 
HOOKER (S-AREA)
Niagara Falls, New York
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : Hooker's S-Area Landfill covers 8 acres on the Buffalo Avenue
Plant in Niagara Falls, Niagara County, New York. The plant is owned by Occidental Chemicals Corp.
(OCC--formerly known as Hooker Chemicals and Plastics). From 1947 to 1975, OCC dumped about
65,000 tons of inorganic and organic wastes at S-Area, which is built on partially reclaimed land from the
Niagara River. These wastes include: hexachlorobutadiene (C-46), hexachlorocyclopentadiene (C-56),
chlorinated benzenes, chlorinated toluenes, trichlorophenols, benzene, and toluene.
 
Both surface water and ground water are contaminated. Chemicals have migrated through the bedrock
and overburden to adjacent areas. Traces of S-Area chemicals have been detected in the finished drinking
water from Niagara Falls' water treatment plant, which is about 200 yards east of S-Area. This plant serves
77,000 people. Contaminated run-off and ground water flow into the Niagara River.
 
The Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, has brought a Federal civil action against OCC seeking
injunctive relief.
 
Status (July 1983) : To alleviate the threat to the drinking water, the city has closed the contaminated main
intake tunnel and put an emergency tunnel into service.
 
In June 1983, EPA allocated a first installment of $700,000 for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
