NPL Site Narrative for Hooker Chemical &
Plastics Corp./Ruco Polymer Corp.
 
HOOKER CHEMICAL & PLASTICS CORP./RUCO POLYMER CORP.
Hicksville, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Hooker Chemical & Plastics Corp./Ruco Polymer Corp.
Site covers 72 acres in an industrial park area of Hicksville on Long Island, Nassau County, New York. The
surrounding area is highly urbanized. Hooker/Ruco manufactures plastics, latex, and esters on the site.
 
Hooker/Ruco discharged liquid wastes into dry wells from 1951 to 1975. The wells for Plant 2, which
manufactured polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and latex, received approximately 2 million gallons per year of
waste water from 1956 to 1975. The primary materials were 0.1 percent PVC resin solids, 0.1 percent
vinyl chloride, trichloroethylene, and vinyl acetate. In addition, unknown amounts of styrene and butadiene
were discharged from latex processing. The well for Plant 1, which manufactured esters, received waste
water containing "considerable" amounts of mixed glycols and alcohols, according to the Nassau County
Health Department. The waste water also included tetrachloroethylene, methanol, and organic acids such
as adipic, trimellitic, maleic, and phthalic.
 
From 1975 through 1980, the Health Department verified contamination of industrial wells at the
neighboring Grumman Aerospace Corp. with high levels of vinyl chloride and other chlorinated organic
compounds. The maximum level was 50 parts per billion. The Health Department determined that Hooker/
Ruco was the only producer and user of vinyl chloride on Long Island. There are 4 public supply wells
within 1 mile of the site; more than 24 are within 3 miles, of which one, Hicksville Water District, serves
58,000 persons.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
