HOPEWELL PRECISION AREA CONTAMINATION
Hopewell Junction, New York
Dutchess County
19th Congressional District
 
Site Location/Size :
  The Hopewell Precision Area Contamination is located in Hopewell Junction, New York, in Dutchess
County. Operations at Hopewell Precision Inc., an active contract manufacturer of sheet metal parts
and assemblies, have resulted in a ground water contamination plume beneath and downgradient of
the current and former Hopewell Precision properties. The combined size of these adjacent properties
is approximately 5.7 acres and the plume extends approximately 1.5 miles downgradient. The area
surrounding the site consists mostly of residences, all of which are served by private wells and septic
systems.
 
Site History :
  Hopewell Precision operated at its 15 Ryan Drive location from 1977 until 1980 and at the adjacent
property since 1980. A painting process at Hopewell Precision, including degreasing parts prior to wet
spray paint application, generated waste paint, thinners, and degreaser wastes that the company dumped
directly onto the ground at the 15 Ryan Drive location. The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYSDEC) performed Hazardous Waste Compliance Inspections of Hopewell Precision
in May 1987 and October 2002. As a result of both inspections, NYSDEC cited Hopewell Precision for
violations of hazardous waste regulations.
 
Site Contamination/Contaminants :
  Significantly elevated levels of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs), including 1,1,1-trichloroethane
(TCA) and trichloroethylene (TCE), have been detected in drinking wells downgradient of the former/
current Hopewell Precision properties. Numerous wells out of a total of 450 wells sampled by EPA
Emergency Response Program indicated levels exceeding health-based benchmarks.
 
Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment :
  Significant VOC contamination has been detected in drinking wells and several monitoring wells located
on the Hopewell Precision property. Ground water contamination has potentially affected more than 150
individuals. Since the site was proposed to the NPL, the number of wells with levels exceeding State and/
or Federal health-based benchmarks have increased to 51 wells. Additionally, based on the results of an
indoor air investigation at Hopewell Precision Area Contamination, EPA has identified the movement of
significant TCE vapors into residences. Hopewell Precision Area Contamination is also believed to have an
impact on ponds located downgradient of the current/former Hopewell Precision properties.
 
Response Activities (to date) :

  NYSDEC installed point of entry systems (POETs) to treat well water in 14 homes. EPA installed
POET systems to treat well water in 37 homes. In addition, since the site was proposed to the NPL,
EPA increased the number of subslab ventilation systems (SVSs) in homes with significant soil gas
concentrations to 42. EPA continues to conduct drinking well and soil gas monitoring and will continue to
evaluate the need for additional POETs and/or SVS systems.
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated
with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent
of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
