 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the haz ardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to th ese substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs ca n be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2011 
HORMIGAS  GROUND  WATER PLUME  Caguas , Puerto Rico  
  
 
 Site Location: 
The Hormigas Ground Water Plume site, which consists of a ground water plume with no identified source(s) of contamination, is located in the municipality of Caguas, in interior east-central Puerto Rico.  
 Site History: 
The former Hormigas public water system (PWSID 5426) consisted of two wells (Eufracia and Hormigas) and served a population of 5,488 people.  In August 2006, t he system’s operator, Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA), detected tetrachloroethene (PCE) above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) in the Eufracia well.  In response, the Commonwealth issued Notices of Violation in November 2007 and an Administrative  Order in February 2008.  PRASA closed t he Hormigas water system and disconnected the wells in February 2009.  EPA collected two ground water samples from the Eufracia well in August 2009, and the results confirmed the presence of  PCE. Trichloroethene (TCE) and cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2-DCE) were also detected in the Eufracia well .  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Chlorinated solvents (i.e., PCE, TCE, and cis-1,2-DCE) are present in ground water.  The PCE and TCE concentrations significantly exceed the MCLs. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The Hormigas public water system, which provided water to more than 5,000 persons for many years , is no longer operational.  Several community supply wells located within approximately 1 mile of the plume could suffer future impacts.  
 Response Activities (to date): 
The Commonwealth issued Notices of Violation to PRASA in November 2007 and an Administrative  Order in February 2008.  The Hormigas water system was closed in February 2009.  In December 2009, EPA conducted a reconnaissance effort in the vicinity of the Hormigas and Eufracia wells as part of a Site Discovery Initiative to identify po ssible sources of contamination.  In February 2010, EPA collected soil  samples from seven facilities identified as po ssible sources.  Although PCE was detected in one soil sample, there is not sufficient evidence to identify the source of ground water contamination.  
 Need for NPL Listing: 
Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.   
