NPL Site Narrative for Horseshoe Road
 
HORSESHOE ROAD
Sayreville, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (May 10, 1993) : The Horseshoe Road site covers approximately 9 acres on
Horseshoe Road near the Raritan River in northern Sayreville, Middlesex County, New Jersey. The area
around the site is densely populated and includes large residential, business, commercial, and industrial
areas. Approximately 47 houses are located to the southeast within 0.5 miles of the site.
 
The site consists of four areas that are considered one NPL site because: (1) they are part of the
same operation; (2) in general, they have the same potentially responsible parties; (3) contamination is
threatening the same ground water, surface water, and air; and (4) they are no more than about 1,000 feet
apart.
 
The history of the site is complex, involving numerous real estate transactions. At least 18 entities were
involved in the four areas during 1965-81, according to the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy (NJDEPE). The four areas are described below.
 
Horseshoe Road Drum Dump (Marsh Area Drums), where approximately 70 drums, many corroded and
some labeled cyanide, were discovered during a fire in 1981. Using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA
relocated the drums onto the Atlantic Development Corp. area of the site. The dump is in a wetland.
 
Atlantic Development Corp. Area, where several companies manufactured, processed, and blended
various chemicals. During 1975-82, NJDEPE took numerous legal actions against the companies. In
mid-1980, NJDEPE removed over 1,000 drums from the area after the companies failed to do so. NJDEPE
analyses of soil samples in 1985 detected volatile organic compounds (including toluene), semivolatile
organic compounds, and heavy metals. EPA soil analyses in 1989 detected similar hazardous substances,
plus pesticides and PCBs. In an April 1991 onsite inspection, EPA found 400 5-gallon containers holding
solids and semisolids of various colors. Most containers were open, and many were crushed as a result of
a fire in 1983.
 
Sayreville Pesticide Dump, an abandoned property now in the custody of the State. In the April 1991
inspection, EPA found at least 160 corroded or crushed drums, many containing a white powder.
NJDEPE's 1985 analyses detected benzene, ethylbenzene, and toluene in soil, and EPA's 1989 analyses
detected 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene, copper, and mercury. Surface water and sediments in a small stream
originating near the Sayreville Pesticide Dump contain heavy metals (copper, lead, and mercury), phenol,
bis (2-chloroethyl) ether, methoxychlor, lindane, chloroform, and 1,2-dichloroethane, according to EPA's
1989 analyses. Hard clams are harvested from Raritan Bay and Sandy Hook Bay, coastal tidal waters
within 15 miles downstream of the site. Wetlands on and off the site are also threatened. An estimated
14,000 people obtain drinking water from public wells within 4 miles of the site.
 
Atlantic Resources Corp., where precious metals, and perhaps solvents, were recycled during 1972-85 by
Atlantic Resources Corp. and International Resources Corp. Twice during the winter of 1986-87, mercury
spilled onto the ground. In March 1987, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to remove 70 pounds of
mercury and contaminated soil to a hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act. EPA also removed 30 5-gallon containers of sodium cyanide, which was
used in the metal recycling process.
 
Status (September 1995) : Since the site's proposal in May 1993, removal actions have been completed at
three areas adjoining the Atlantic Resources Area, namely the Atlantic Development Area, the Horseshoe
Road Dump area, and the Sayreville Pesticide area. These removal actions involved soil sampling,
fencing, and the stabilization and removal of contaminated surface material, storage tank contents, and
drums.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
