NPL Site Narrative for Howe Valley Landfill
 
HOWE VALLEY LANDFILL
Howe Valley, Kentucky
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : Howe Valley Landfill is an inactive industrial waste landfill in
eastern Hardin County, Kentucky, approximately 4 miles southwest of the community of Howe Valley.
Kentucky Industrial Services operated the landfill from 1967 through 1976, when its State industrial waste
disposal permit expired. Current ownership of the site has not yet been determined.
 
The site is in a 10-acre sinkhole. In 1979, the Kentucky Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Cabinet (KNREPC) conducted a dye trace study that established a positive connection between the site
and local ground water. Steel-manufacturing sludges, plating sludges, galvanizing wastes, insulation, and
insulation by-products are probably buried in the landfill, according to State files. Wastes were disposed of
in drums and also in bulk. Waste insulation material and drums are exposed on the surface of the sinkhole.
According to tests conducted by EPA, surface soil and sediment from surface water on the site contain
elevated concentrations relative to background of arsenic, chromium, and other metals.
 
Ground water at risk includes private wells for 25 residences within 1 mile of the site and a spring 2 miles
from the site used as a public water supply. The spring serves approximately 35,000 people.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA has completed a search for individuals or companies potentially responsible
for wastes associated with the site and plans to send them notice letters informing them of their potential
liability.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
