NPL Site Narrative for Hudson River PCBs
 
HUDSON RIVER PCBS
Hudson River, New York
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : The Hudson River PCBs Site is a 40-mile stretch of the Hudson
River between Mechanicville and Fort Edward, New York. General Electric Co. discharged an estimated
1.1 million pounds of PCBs into this stretch of river. The State has identified 40 "hot spots," defined as
sediments contaminated with greater than 50 parts per million (ppm) of PCBs. Also included in the site are
five "remnant" areas, which are river sediments exposed when the level of the river was lowered due to
removal of the Fort Edward Dam. The State has taken initial measures to stabilize the remnant areas from
erosion.
 
In September 1980, Congress passed an amendment to the Clean Water Act (CWA) that included the
Hudson River PCB Reclamation Demonstration Project. Under this legislation, the EPA Administrator
could authorize a 75 percent grant, not to exceed $20 million. EPA issued a final Environmental Impact
Statement in October 1982 evaluating various dredging alternatives for a demonstration project. EPA has
prepared a feasibility study to evaluate alternative remedial actions under CERCLA. The Administrator has
determined that CERCLA funds may be used for remedial action at the remnant areas and for evaluating
the effectiveness of the water supply system at Waterford, New York.
 
Status (June 1984) : EPA has completed a draft feasibility study identifying alternatives for remedial action.
A search for parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site has been completed, and
EPA has sent letters to two potentially responsible parties notifying them of possible legal action under
CERCLA.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
