NPL Site Narrative for Hudson Refinery
 
HUDSON REFINERY
Cushing, Oklahoma
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 23, 1999) : The Hudson Refinery site is located in Cushing, Payne County,
Oklahoma. Surrounding the site are residential properties to the east and west, and residential and
agricultural land to the north. Commercial properties are located to the south. Highway 33 (Main Street)
separates the site into a "north" and "south" refinery.
 
Historical aerial photographs indicate that the site operated as a refinery beginning as early as the
mid-1930s. Little is known about the operations or waste management practices of the facility prior to
1977, although the aerial photographs show process areas and tank farms. Refining operations ended
in 1982 and the site was abandoned. The majority of the tanks have been removed from the tank farm
areas. Some tanks, however, have been partially salvaged, compromising tank integrity, and many of the
remaining tanks contain residual materials.
 
EPA identified six sources of contamination at the site during a 1998 removal assessment and a
1998-1999 expanded site inspection. The north and south refineries contain a 10-acre land treatment unit,
a tank which contained 6,000 gallons of hydrofluoric acid, two areas of contaminated soil, storage tanks
containing tetraethyl lead, and several other storage tanks. During a December 1998 emergency removal
action, EPA transferred the 6,000 gallons of hydrofluoric acid into stable containers (which remain on the
site) pending disposal under a removal action. Approximately 3.4 miles of piping and 96 vessels that may
still contain hydrofluoric acid are located on the site.
 
Elevated levels of chromium, mercury, polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs), as well as pure hydrofluoric acid and tetraethyl lead, were detected in the sources at the
site. Elevated levels of chromium and mercury also were detected in wetlands associated with a former
biotreatment pond at the site.
 
On March 4, 1999, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) issued a public
health advisory for the Hudson Refinery site because of the immediate threats to public health posed by
hydrofluoric acid and tetraethyl lead, as well as asbestos, found at the site.
 
Status (July 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
