NPL Site Narrative for Hunts Disposal
Landfill
 
HUNTS DISPOSAL LANDFILL
Caledonia, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Hunts Disposal Landfill covers approximately 82 acres on
County Line Road and Foley Road in Caledonia, Wisconsin. The site is an old sand and gravel pit that
was first permitted in 1959 as a dump by the Racine County Board of Adjustments. Between 1959 and
1974, under a number of owners, the landfill accepted municipal and industrial wastes. In 1970, it was
licensed by the State to accept noncombustible trash, garbage, and wooden material. Waste Management
of Wisconsin, Inc., purchased the landfill in December 1974 from Caledonia Corp. Landfill, which had
acquired it in January 1972 when it was operating as Hunts Disposal Landfill. Waste Management
immediately stopped accepting wastes, then graded the site, covered it with 2 feet of sandy earth, and
seeded it. No topsoil was added.
 
In August 1976, the Racine County Parks Department purchased the property and in 1982, with Waste
Management, started remedial work, including repairing erosion damage, sealing leachate seeps, and
revegetating the site. These activities were in response to a request made by the Wisconsin Department of
Natural Resources (WDNR).
 
In 1984, the City of Oak Creek, at the request of WDNR and in response to a proposal to construct a
drainage channel in the vicinity of the site, installed three shallow monitoring wells. Samples of ground
water, along with surface water, soil, and sediment, were collected. WDNR detected iron, manganese, and
chromium in ground water, and PCB-1242, cadmium, and tin in soil.
 
Soil on the site is permeable, which facilitates the movement of contaminants into ground water. About
2,300 people draw drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
The site borders the Root River in a sparsely populated area. The river is used for recreational activities.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA has conducted a search for companies and individuals potentially responsible
for wastes associated with the site. In late March 1987, EPA sent them general notice letters informing
them of their potential liability. EPA is negotiating with the parties for them to conduct a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
