NPL Site Narrative for Hunterstown Road
 
HUNTERSTOWN ROAD
Straban Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Hunterstown Road Site covers 3 acres on both sides
of Hunterstown Road, Straban Township, Adams County, Pennsylvania. From 1970 to 1984, the owner
of the property apparently disposed of wastes generated by several local corporations. The operation had
no permit. The majority of the waste, consisting of paint sludges and various solvents, was dumped on
the ground. Ground water and surface water are contaminated with various volatile organic compounds,
according to tests conducted by the State and EPA. Trichloroethylene (TCE) is the predominant chemical
found on the site. About 9,500 people use wells within 3 miles of the site for drinking water.
 
In April 1984, Westinghouse Electric Corp., a generator of wastes disposed there, excavated a waste
lagoon and contaminated soil on the site and transported the materials to an approved disposal site
under an Administrative Order EPA issued under Section 106 of CERCLA. As an emergency action, EPA
constructed a fence around the lagoon area. However, soils, ground water, and a small stream on the site
still are contaminated, according to EPA analyses.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In January 1985, EPA and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources signed a multisite cooperative agreement which provides CERCLA funds to the State
for various sites, including Hunterstown Road. The funds are to start work preparatory to a remedial
investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and
identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
In April 1985, EPA completed a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the
site. Also in April, EPA took on-site and off-site soil and water samples.
 
A final workplan for the RI/FS is due shortly. The State will then begin to negotiate with potentially
responsible parties for the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
