NPL Site Narrative for Treasure Island
Naval Air Station - Hunters Point Annex
 
TREASURE ISLAND NAVAL AIR STATION - HUNTERS POINT
ANNEX
San Francisco, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : Hunters Point Annex of Treasure Island Naval Station, formerly
the Hunters Point Naval Shipyard, encompasses 936 acres (522 acres dry land and 414 acres submerged
in San Francisco Bay) in the southeast corner of San Francisco, California. Established in 1869, the
shipyard was the first privately owned dry dock on the Pacific Coast. The Navy first used the installation
in 1919 to construct, maintain, and repair ships, and in 1939 purchased it from California Dry Dock Co.
Triple A Machine Shop leased the facility from the Navy during 1976-87, subleasing numerous buildings
to private tenants. The Navy regained possession of the shipyard from Triple A in 1987, but continues
the subleasing. Operations of the facility over many decades generated a wide variety of solid and liquid
wastes, including paints, solvents, fuels, acids, bases, metals, PCBs, and asbestos.
 
Hunters Point Annex is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in
1978. Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up
contamination from hazardous materials. The Navy has identified a number of potentially contaminated
areas, including Industrial Landfill, Bay Fill Area, Pickling and Plating Yard, Battery and Electroplating
Shop, Old Transformer Storage Yard, Power Plant, Oil Reclamation Ponds, Tank Farm, numerous spill
areas, and areas leased by Triple A. These areas are potential sources of contaminant migration into
ground water and into San Francisco Bay. In the past, wastes and waste water were directly discharged
into San Francisco Bay.
 
Benzene, PCBs, toluene, and phenols have been detected in on-site ground water in IRP tests conducted
in 1987. A bottling company draws ground water from springs within 3 miles of hazardous substances on
the annex. The company serves 19,000 people.
 
Sediments contain elevated levels of heavy metals and polyaromatic hydrocarbons. Area surface waters
are used for recreational activities, commercial navigation, and fishing.
 
The Navy is continuing IRP studies and has undertaken some interim cleanup measures.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : Workplans for additional interim measures are being developed. Sampling
is underway as part of a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. Sampling is scheduled to continue
into 1991.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
