NPL Site Narrative for Iceland Coin
Laundry Area Ground Water Plume
 
ICELAND COIN LAUNDRY AREA GROUND WATER PLUME
Vineland, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 1999) : The Iceland Coin Laundry Area Ground Water Plume site is an area
of contaminated ground water located in a commercial/residential area of the City of Vineland, Cumberland
County, New Jersey. Based on a review of analytical data from ground water samples collected in the
area, the contaminated ground water plume area encompasses South Delsea Drive, Dirk Drive, Garrison
Road, Lois Lane, South Orchard Road, West Elmer Road, and West Korff Drive.
 
On three occasions, between September 1987 and October 1990, ground water samples were collected
from a drinking water well located at 1276 Garrison Road by the Vineland City Health Department.
Analytical results from these samples indicated the presence of volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
exceeding State and Federal Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs). Subsequently, the Vineland City
Health Department collected drinking water well samples from 55 residences located in the area between
December 1990 and September 1991. Analytical resultsfrom these sampling activities indicated the
presence of VOCs, primarily tetrachloroethylene (PCE). PCE was detected above the State and Federal
MCL in 16 of these 21 wells. Drinking water contamination is documented for 16 wells, which serve a
total of approximately 44 people. Potable wells within 4 miles of the site, and drawing from the aquifer of
concern, serve an approximate population of 28,770 people.
 
As a result of the private well contamination, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP) installed point of entry treatment units to the affected residences as a temporary remedial
measure until public supply water mains could be extended to the area. Public supply water mains were
extended to these areas in 1994. Currently, not all residences are connected to the public supply.
 
In 1995-1996, the NJDEP conducted an expanded site investigation at the former Iceland Coin Laundry
and Dry Cleaning facility. This investigation included subsurface soil and ground water sampling. The
results of soil sampling conducted in November 1995 showed PCE concentrations up to 8 micrograms
per kilogram (µg/kg). Analytical results of ground water samples collected from on- and off-site direct
push borings in November 1995 and May 1996 indicated PCE concentrations at concentrations up to
489 micrograms per liter (µg/L). The former Iceland Coin Laundry and Dry Cleaners facility contributes
to the ground water contamination in the area. In addition, PCE was also detected in samples collected
from areas not expected to be impacted by the Iceland facility, which may suggest the possibility of other
sources contaminating the ground water.
 
Status (October 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
