NPL Site Narrative for Idaho Pole Co.
 
IDAHO POLE CO.
Bozeman, Montana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Idaho Pole Co. treats wood products with pentachlorophenol
(PCP) on a 10-acre site in Bozeman, Gallatin County, Montana. The pole yard has been in operation
since 1946. Ground water is very shallow and flows to the north/northwest, where it discharges into Rocky
Creek. About 1,250 people use wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
Any hazardous material leaking onto the ground during the wood-treatment process could contaminate
ground water due to highly permeable soils and shallow ground water. A greater concern is that waste
water discharged onto the surface at the facility could rapidly infiltrate the shallow ground water. The facility
has a history of surface water problems associated with its discharges.
 
In 1978, the State investigated a complaint concerning PCP in Rocky Creek. At that time, a ditch,
originating at the Idaho Pole plant and running from the plant for about 200 to 300 yards before entering
Rocky Creek, contained large quantities of PCP. While minute quantities were noted at the mouth of the
ditch and running into Rocky Creek, large quantities had collected on the rocks and vegetation along and in
the ditch. Stains high on the sides of the ditch and on vegetation indicated that discharge had been much
greater in the past.
 
Following the investigation, the State issued a compliance order in 1984 requiring Idaho Pole to take
measures to eliminate discharges into Rocky Creek and to prevent the future placement of wastes in
locations where they were likely to pollute State waters. Idaho Pole started work to comply with the State's
order. However, because of leaking pipes, leaking tanks, and a deteriorated main pumphouse sump,
soil contamination at the facility was more extensive than plant personnel realized. Therefore, working in
conjunction with the State, Idaho Pole constructed an interceptor trench running the length of the property
boundary to halt the movement of PCP into ground water.
 
In August 1983, EPA collected samples at the old Bozeman Landfill, including the trench running the length
of the Idaho Pole property. The results showed that a considerable amount of PCP was migrating from the
Idaho Pole plant. A State sample showed even higher PCP concentrations.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Idaho Pole has analyzed samples from approximately 15 ground water monitoring
wells it installed at the site under order of the State Water Quality Bureau (WQB). Idaho Pole has
submitted a report of the data collected and is developing alternatives for cleanup. WQB is evaluating the
data. Idaho Pole recently applied for a permit under the Montana Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
for the PCP-contaminated water currently discharged to the stream.
 
EPA will continue to monitor the WQB enforcement action. EPA inspected the site in December 1985 and
will soon issue a report regarding the potential for an immediate removal.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
