NPL Site Narrative for Ilada Energy Co.
 
ILADA ENERGY CO.
East Cape Girardeau, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Ilada Energy Co. Site covers 20.3 acres in East Cape
Girardeau, Alexander County, Illinois. In 1942, the Federal Government built a bulk fuel oil storage/transfer
terminal on the site, which had access to the Mississippi River. The 17 tanks on-site hold in excess of 11
million gallons. The Government used the terminal until the early or mid-1950s, when it was deeded back
to the original land owner.
 
During 1981-83, Ilada Energy Co. operated the tank farm as a waste oil reclamation facility. The process
consisted of removing bottom sediment and water from the waste oil and blending for desired heat content.
 
An inspection conducted by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) during 1982 found that the
company was improperly storing, handling, mixing, and disposing waste oils contaminated with PCBs. The
PCB-laden waste oil was being burned in an on-site boiler. Of the 17 tanks, 11 contained oil contaminated
with chlorinated organic solvents, metals, and constituents of PCBs. Spills and leakage of oily material
were observed under the valves of the tanks and in the designated loading and unloading areas.
 
In January 1983, EPA filed a complaint against the company for PCB violations under the Toxic
Substances Control Act. The company signed a Consent Decree to clean up the site but abandoned the
site before taking any action. Early in 1986, IEPA installed six monitoring wells on the site; subsequent
analyses detected arsenic in two of the wells. An estimated 500 people obtain drinking water from wells
within 3 miles of the site.
 
The facility is within the floodplain of the Mississippi River. The area is relatively flat, with the site at a
surface elevation of about 334 feet above sea level. Ground water flows south-southwest toward the
Mississippi River. The facility is protected from the Mississippi River by a levee that borders the southern
edge of the site. The surrounding area is sparsely populated by farms and cultivated fields.
 
This facility is being proposed for the NPL because it is classified as a non- or late-filer under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Although the facility was treating, storing, or disposing hazardous
waste after November 19, 1980, it did not file a Part A permit application by that date as required and has
little or no history of compliance with RCRA Subtitle C.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
