NPL Site Narrative for Indian Head Naval
Surface Warfare Center
 
INDIAN HEAD NAVAL SURFACE WARFARE CENTER
Indian Head, Maryland
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 13, 1995) : The Naval Surface Warfare Center, Indian Head Division
(NSWC), formerly known as the Naval Ordnance Station, Indian Head, is located in southern Maryland
on the Indian Head Peninsula. It is bounded on the south by Mattawoman Creek, on the west and north
by the Potomac River, and on the east by the town of Indian Head. NSWC, which occupies approximately
3,400 acres, was established in 1890 as the Naval Proving Ground, with the mission of conducting proof
and acceptance testing of munitions. The facility's mission was expanded to include the manufacturing
and testing of explosives and propellants; it later was known as the Naval Powder Factory (1932 to
1949) and the Naval Propellent Plant (1958 to 1965). In 1966, the facility was designated as the Naval
Ordnance Station. Over its 100-year history of operations, the facility has manufactured a variety of
munitions chemicals, including smokeless powder, ammonium picrate, nitroglycerine, nitrocellulose, and
nitroguanidine, as well as sulfuric and nitric acids used in the manufacturing of chemicals.
 
Manufacturing, testing, loading, and assembly operations at the site have generated a variety of explosive,
reactive, and hazardous wastes. Hazardous wastes generated from facility operations were routinely
dumped into pits and landfills on the facility or burned in open burning grounds. Industrial wastewaters
were routinely discharged to septic systems and to open ditches and storm sewers that empty directly into
surrounding bodies of water.
 
Over a period of 11 years, in 6 separate investigations, more than 100 contaminated source areas have
been identified at the NSWC. Only 30 of those areas have been investigated in sufficient detail to be
evaluated for CERCLA eligibility. The 30 sources generally fall into 6 categories: (1) releases of mercury
from the testing of nitroglycerine and the production of oxidizers; (2) releases of silver from x-ray processes
and from the production of acetal formal (a component of propellants); (3) solvent spill and disposal areas;
(4) open burning grounds used for the disposal of explosives and solvents; (5) land disposal units and
storage units that received hazardous wastes; and (6) discharges of industrial process wastewaters
containing hazardous constituents. Only eight sources, those associated with the release of mercury, have
been evaluated under the HRS.
 
The eight sources are located in two clusters, approximately 5,700 feet apart, in the Explosive Process
building, the Biazzi Plant, and six laboratory buildings. One of the sources involved the production of
hydrazide nitroformate (an oxidizer used in propellants). Over a period of 8 years, waste mercuric nitrate,
dissolved in nitric acid, was poured into an unlined 6-by-4-foot bed of limestone chips located along
the west bank of a drainage ditch behind the laboratory. The other seven sources consist of mercury
releases attributed to more than 80 years of routine spilling of liquid mercury during nitrate-ester analysis
of explosives manufactured at the facility. During the analyses, mercury commonly was spilled on the floor
and into floor drains; nitrometer bulbs occasionally exploded; mercury vessels often were broken; during
the rinsing step, mercury was washed out of the vessels and into sink drains.
 
Releases to surface water have been documented at all seven of the laboratories that conducted nitrate-
ester analysis. Sink and floor drains that routinely received spills elemental mercury are connected to
septic systems, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers that discharge to open ditches leading to nearby
Mattawoman Creek. Mattawoman Creek converges with the Potomac River. Mattawoman Creek and the
Potomac River both provide habitats for several endangered marine and wetland species, including the
bald eagle. Both Mattawoman and the Potomac are used for commercial fishing, harvesting of shellfish,
and recreation. Numerous private wells in the area draw from shallow ground water, which may be
contaminated from site activities.
 
Status (September 1995) : The Navy has developed a Site Management Plan for the ongoing Installation
Restoration Program. RI/FSs will be initiated at 12 sources and 30 other sources will be screened to
determine if further investigation is necessary. Removal actions have been completed at two sources and
begun at a third. All of these accelerated actions involve the removal of contaminated soils to prevent the
further spread of pollutants.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
