NPL Site Narrative for Indian Refinery-
Texaco Lawrenceville
 
INDIAN REFINERY-TEXACO LAWRENCEVILLE
Lawrenceville, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 28, 1998) : Indian Refinery-Texaco Lawrenceville is located in the southeast
section of Lawrenceville, Illinois. The facility is approximately 940 acres in size and is currently owned
by American Western Refining Company, Indian Refining Company, and the City of Lawrenceville.
American Western owns the refinery portion of the facility. The remainder of the facility consists of the
northeast portion of the facility, which is known as Indian Acres, and a land treatment area located on
the northwest portion of the property. Indian Acres and the land treatment unit are owned by the Indian
Refining Company. However, a small northern section (approximately 20 acres) of Indian Acres was sold
to the City of Lawrenceville for the construction of a wastewater treatment plant. The Indian Refinery-
Texaco Lawrenceville site is bordered to the south and to the west by wetlands, agricultural lands, and
residential areas. Residential areas are also located north of the site. The Embarras River forms the
eastern boundary of the facility.
 
The facility began operations in 1907. A variety of operations occurred on the property as part of the
crude oil refining process. The northeastern portion of the site, referred to currently as Indian Acres and
Indian Acres North, was dedicated to lube oil refining and production. The lube oil production facility was
abandoned and demolished some time after World War II and the area was used for land disposal. Typical
refinery wastes deposited within this area included: lube oil filter clay sludge; acid sludge; and spent filter
clays. The current refining facility is located in the central portion of the site and consists of a wastewater
treatment area, process units, refinery equipment, settling basins, API separators, tanks, and disposal
areas. The western portion of the site contains land treatment units and tanks. The southern portion
consists mainly of tanks, wetlands, and a pond.
 
In 1983 and 1984, a CERCLA Preliminary Assessment and a Screening Site Inspection were conducted
at the refinery while the facility was still active and owned by Texaco. There is no documentation that
samples were collected. In 1985, Texaco Refining and Marketing Inc. suspended operation and shut down
the refinery units. Through various stock transfers and change in ownerships, the following companies
have all owned the facility: Indian Refining Company, Texaco Refining and Marketing, Texaco Refining
and Marketing Inc. Holdings, Oil Producers Association Inc., Capserrco Inc., Indian Refining Limited
Partnership (a subsidiary of Castle Energy Corporation), and American Western Refining, L.P. In 1986
the Illinois EPA conducted a Preliminary Review and visual site inspection in which 33 solid waste
management units were identified. In 1996, the Illinois EPA's Site Assessment Unit conducted a CERCLA
Site Team Evaluation Prioritization (STEP) investigation of the refinery and property surrounding the
complex. Environmental sampling was undertaken in July and December of 1996. During this inspection,
several sources were characterized for purposes of Hazard Ranking System scoring. These sources
include the Indian Acres (wastepile); Heliport (landfill); B&O Pond (surface impoundment); C-Pond (surface
impoundment), Hickory Street property (wastepile); and the 4th Street property (wastepile).
 
The surface water overland flow/flood migration pathway and the soil exposure pathway were scored
for this site. An observed release to the Embarras River and two wetlands were documented. Three
individuals reside at areas of observed contamination with Level I concentrations of contamination.
 
Status (December 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
