NPL Site Narrative for Industri-Plex
 
INDUSTRI-PLEX
Woburn, Massachusetts
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Industri-Plex 128 Site covers 250 acres in North Woburn,
Massachusetts. Between about 1953 and 1981, Merrimac Chemical Co. and its successor, Monsanto
Co., manufactured insecticides, explosives, acids, and other chemicals at the site. In the late 1960s, much
of the site was acquired by the Mark Phillip Trust for industrial development. Excavation in the 1970s
uncovered and mixed 130 years' accumulation of industrial by-products and wastes. Many of the pits,
piles, and lagoons are continuously leaching toxic metals into the environment. As excavation progressed,
pockets of buried animal hides from glue manufacturing were exposed to the air, causing odors. In June
1979, the Army Corps of Engineers and the State issued a cease and desist order to the Trustee relative
to the placing of dredged or fill material into the wetlands on the site. Both the Corps and the State entered
into Consent Decrees requiring the defendant to deal with the hazardous waste problems at the site. The
defendant did not.
 
This site was first listed under the name "Mark Phillip Trust."
 
Status (July 1983) : Shortly after the site was listed, Stauffer Chemical Corp. came forward to discuss its
role in cleanup of this site. Extensive discussions resulted in a Consent Order, which outlines a two-phase
investigation leading to a long-term solution. Stauffer has completed the field portion of Phase I. Phase II, a
feasibility study, is scheduled to begin in mid-1983.
 
Since May 1981, EPA has spent $334,000 on investigation of the site and installation of a 10,000-foot
fence.
 
EPA has identified other parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site and is seeking
their cooperation in the cleanup.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
