NPL Site Narrative for Industrial Latex
Corp.
 
INDUSTRIAL LATEX CORP.
Wallington Borough, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Industrial Latex Corp. Site covers 9.67 acres at 350 Mount
Pleasant Avenue, Borough of Wallington, Bergen County, New Jersey. The company is now inactive. The
site consists of two main buildings comprising 18,000 square feet of industrial space and several smaller
structures. The site is part of an extensive industrial development bordering the Conrail/New Jersey Transit
rail corridor. Major residential developments, three schools, and an outdoor recreation complex are nearby.
 
From 1951 to the early 1980s, Industrial Latex formulated chemical adhesives and natural and synthetic
rubber compounds at this location. Process wastes were drummed and either stored prior to disposal
or buried in unlined trenches. Raw materials for the manufacture of latex adhesives and other rubber
compounds were stored in 22 underground tanks. Waste solvents were stored in an aboveground
tank prior to reclamation. Chemical wastes were flushed into an on-site sanitary septic system. Poor
operational procedures, in conjunction with on-site waste disposal practices, likely resulted in widespread
contamination of surface and subsurface soil.
 
In 1986-87, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to remove approximately 1,200 drums, 22 buried tanks,
and chemical processing vats from the site. The materials were transported to a hazardous waste facility
regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. During the removal action,
EPA found toluene, xylene, ethylbenzene, and benzene in on-site soils.
 
In January 1987, EPA sampled air, subsurface soils, and on-site sources of hazardous waste; installed 12
monitoring wells; and sampled the wells.
 
Soils on the site are permeable and ground water shallow (15 feet in some cases), conditions that facilitate
movement of contaminants into ground water. An estimated 71,000 people obtain drinking water from
public and private wells within 3 miles of the site. A Borough of Wallington well is 0.4 mile to the northwest.
 
Surface water in the area is used for recreational activities.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is preparing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
