NPL Site Narrative for Industrial Excess
Landfill
 
INDUSTRIAL EXCESS LANDFILL
Uniontown, Ohio
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Industrial Excess Landfill covers 30 acres in Uniontown,
Stark County, Ohio. While in operation (from about 1959 to 1980), the privately owned and operated
landfill accepted residential and commercial wastes, as well as approximately 1 million gallons of industrial
wastes. The landfill is capped with a rather permeable material and is on sand and gravel soils. All
residents in the immediate area (about 19,000) use private wells for drinking water.
 
In 1983, area residents complained to the State about contamination of ground water, surface water, and
air, as well as numerous health effects. Analyses by the State confirmed contamination. In 1983, the State
detected slight impacts on on-site surface water from leachate generated within the landfill. Analyses of
residential wells showed low levels of organic chemicals.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In February 1985, the Ohio State Court ordered the owner of the landfill to
control the migration of methane gas. EPA prepared a plan for action at the site involving an active control
system. However, the State allowed installation of a passive control system with monitoring to determine
its effectiveness. The system was evaluated by the State and EPA and determined to be inadequate. In
November 1985, EPA recommended an immediate removal action to control methane migration. Using
CERCLA emergency funds, EPA is installing an active control system.
 
EPA negotiated with parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site to conduct a
remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site
and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
On June 11, 1985, negotiations failed, and EPA undertook the RI/FS with Federal funds. On-site activities
began in August 1985.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
