NPL Site Narrative for Interstate Lead Co.
(ILCO)
 
INTERSTATE LEAD CO. (ILCO)
Leeds, Alabama
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : Interstate Lead Co. (ILCO) owns and operates a
secondary lead smelting and battery recycling facility in Leeds, Jefferson County, Alabama.
 
ILCO has generated, treated, stored, and disposed of lead-bearing waste on-site, as well as off-site in
numerous locations in the Leeds area. Seven locations have been identified: ILCO parking lot (1,370 tons);
City of Leeds landfill (6,335 tons); Fleming's Patio (12,940 tons); Church of God (988 tons); fabricating
shop (unknown quantity); Connell property (unknown quantity); and Gulf Station (unknown quantity). Waste
quantities are based on company estimates. Six of these locations are within 3 miles of the springs and
wells that supply drinking water for 6,000 families in Leeds.
 
In April 1984, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to remove lead-bearing waste from the Church of God
area.
 
Monitoring by the company in January and February of 1985 detected lead and cadmium in ground water
underlying the facility. The State has measured elevated levels of lead in Dry Creek and an unnamed
tributary to Dry Creek adjacent to the facility. The Jefferson County Department of Health in 1983 and 1984
measured elevated lead concentrations in ambient air south and southwest of ILCO.
 
On March 18, 1985, EPA and the State filed a civil enforcement action against ILCO under the Clean
Water Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and CERCLA. In June 1985, EPA
signed a Partial Consent Decree with ILCO to provide preliminary measures to reduce the hazards
associated with the facility while the litigation was pending. ILCO has agreed to temporarily stabilize two
of the contaminated areas (the plant property and the plant parking lot) and to prevent further off-site
migration at these areas. The Partial Consent Decree also requires ILCO to construct a totally enclosed
system to treat storm water. In addition, in June 1985, EPA signed a separate Partial Consent Decree with
a local transporter to stabilize the Fleming's Patio area.
 
ILCO is currently in voluntary reorganization under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy code.
 
Status (January 1986) : The transporter has placed a clay cover on the Fleming's Patio area and fenced
it. ILCO has placed a synthetic liner over the parking lot and has begun construction on the storm water
treatment system.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : This site is being placed on the NPL because it satisfies a component of the NPL/
RCRA policy: The owner has demonstrated inability to finance appropriate remedial action by involing
bankruptcy laws.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
