NPL Site Narrative for Intel Corp.
(Mountain View Plant)
 
INTEL CORP. (MOUNTAIN VIEW PLANT)
Mountain View, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Intel Corp. manufactured semiconductors at a plant in
Mountain View, Santa Clara County, California, between 1968 and 1981. At that time, the facility occupied
2 acres and was surrounded by residential areas, office buildings, and other semiconductor-manufacturing
plants.
 
Monitoring wells on the site are contaminated with trichloroethylene, xylene, vinyl chloride, and 1,1- and
trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, according to analyses conducted by a consultant to Intel. Contamination is
believed to have resulted from leaking underground solvent tanks. About 270,000 people depend on wells
within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
Since early 1982, Intel has been pumping ground water and treating it by carbon adsorption. The company
intends to implement additional cleanup activities, including the installation of a system to pump and treat
contaminated ground water and excavation of soil beneath the underground storage tanks, which were
previously removed. The company is working with the California Regional Water Quality Control Board
(CRWQCB) to determine the full extent of the contamination.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Intel has removed approximately 4,600 cubic yards of contaminated soil and has
installed four wells to pump and treat contaminated ground water.
 
CRWQCB has issued Waste Discharge Requirements to the company. The requirements are the board's
legal mechanism for regulating activities at facilities under its jurisdiction.
 
On August 15, 1985, EPA issued a CERCLA Administrative Order on Consent to Intel Corp.'s Mountain
View Plant, as well as to Fairchild Camera's and Raytheon Corp.'s Mountain View Plants. The order calls
for the three companies to conduct a joint remedial investigation/feasibility study of the area to determine
the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
