NPL Site Narrative for Intermountain
Waste Oil Refinery
 
INTERMOUNTAIN WASTE OIL REFINERY
Bountiful, Utah
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 22, 1999) : The Intermountain Waste Oil Refinery (IWOR) site is located
in southern Bountiful, Davis County, Utah. From 1957 to 1993, waste oils from Utah, Nevada, Idaho, and
Wyoming were received by the IWOR facility and treated on site. Cleaned waste oil was used by area
cement facilities as fuel in their kilns and suppression of coal dust at regional coal mines; waste sludge was
disposed in the North Davis County Landfill or in the Salt Lake County/City Landfill. Wastewater that may
have remained after the treatment process was boiled off at the site. The facility closed to business in May
1993 after receiving several Waste Oil Notices of Violation and Orders from the Utah Attorney General's
office and from the Utah Division of Solid and Hazardous Waste (DSHW). Under a cooperative agreement
with DSHW, the owner began dismantling the refinery and consolidating solid waste on site into a waste
pile of approximately 100 cubic yards on the rear portion of the site. After gathering the waste pile, the
owner ceased remediation of the site, claiming a lack of funds. The site surface was reportedly covered
with approximately two inches of a gravel/soil backfill.
 
In 1996, the Utah Department of Environmental Quality (UDEQ) collected several soil, sediment, ground
water, and surface water samples from residential properties, Mill Creek, an on-site monitoring well, and
sources at IWOR. These samples were collected to delineate areas of observed contamination, determine
whether off-site surface water was impacted, and characterize soil/source contamination. In 1998 an EPA
contractor collected additional samples to further identify sources on site, installed a monitoring well in
an upgradient location to confirm or deny a release to ground water, and attempted to further identify and
delineate target populations in the study area.
 
Analysis of the samples collected during the UDEQ sampling event indicated that several organic
substances (dichloroethene (DCE), trichloroethene (TCE), benzene, and toluene) were present on site,
and that DCE and trichloroethane were present in an on-site monitoring well. The EPA sampling event
confirmed a release of DCE to the East Shore aquifer, as well as further identifying potentially affected
residents of the study area.
 
An evaluation of municipal wells along the Wasatch Front indicates that there are approximately 68,118
residents within a four-mile radius of the IWOR site who rely on ground water from the East Shore aquifer
for drinking water.
 
Status (May 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
