NPL Site Narrative for Intersil Inc./Siemens
Components
 
INTERSIL INC./SIEMENS COMPONENTS
Cupertino, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Intersil, Inc., and Siemens Components have manufactured
semiconductors for several years on two locations near one another covering 15 acres in Cupertino, Santa
Clara County, California. The facilities are surrounded by residential, industrial, and business areas.
 
Investigations conducted in 1982 as part of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board's
underground tank leak detection program found organic solvents, including trichloroethylene, 1,1,1-
trichloroethane, tetrachloroethylene, trichlorofluoroethane, and 1,1-dichloroethylene, in soils on the site and
in ground water on and off the site. Contamination is believed to have resulted from localized spills and
from leaking underground storage tanks, piping, and other equipment involving the two companies. More
than 300,000 people obtain drinking water from public wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Siemens and Intersil began remedial investigations at the site in 1982 and 1983, respectively, under State
supervision. The underground storage tanks were removed, and in 1983 a system was installed to extract
gases from soil; the system was expanded in 1985.
 
In June 1986, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board issued Waste Discharge Requirements
under the California Water Code requiring both companies to determine the extent of contamination in
ground water and soils.
 
In July 1986, a system was installed to pump contaminated ground water in the uppermost aquifer to the
surface and treat it. Since April 1988, a pump and treat system for the two uppermost aquifers has been
in full-scale operation. Intersil stopped operations in 1988, and all remaining underground equipment was
removed.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In February 1990, the two companies released draft reports of remedial
investigations/feasibility studies for the site and off-site downgradient areas. Interim off-site remedial
activities are scheduled to begin in June 1990. Also in June 1990, the State plans to issue tentative site
cleanup requirements and hear public comments on the proposed remedial action plan.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
