NPL Site Narrative for Iron Mountain Mine
 
IRON MOUNTAIN MINE
Redding, California
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : Iron Mountain Mine is a privately owned site in the Klamath
Mountains of Shasta County, 9 miles northwest of Redding, California. The mine area, which encompasses
about 2,000 acres, is drained by Boulder Creek and Slickrock Creek, both tributaries to Spring Creek.
Spring Creek drains into Keswick Reservoir. Flat Creek, which also drains a portion of the site, enters
Keswick Reservoir just upstream of Spring Creek. Keswick Reservoir was formed by the construction of
Keswick Dam on the Sacramento River, which is a major source of Redding's drinking water. The State
has estimated that a daily average of 2,350 pounds of zinc, 300 pounds of copper, and 50 pounds of
cadmium are carried into Keswick Reservoir from the site.
 
Status (July 1983) : In February 1982, the State brought action against the present owners of the site. The
action resulted in a default judgment against the company and fines totalling $16.8 million. In June and
July 1982, the company filed motions to vacate the default judgments, which the Shasta County Superior
Court denied. In August 1982, the company filed an appeal from the denials on its motion. One appeal is
still pending. The company has reached a settlement with the State on the $16.8 million default judgment.
CERCLA funding is being requested for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and
extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
