NPL Site Narrative for Island Chemical
Corp./Virgin Islands Chemical Corp.
 
ISLAND CHEMICAL CORP./VIRGIN ISLANDS CHEMICAL CORP.
Christiansted, Virgin Islands
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (January 1994) : The Island Chemical Corporation/Virgin Islands Chemical
Corporation site is a 3.5-acre facility located in the southwest portion of St. Croix, U.S. Virgin Islands. The
surrounding area is predominantly commercial, with five businesses located adjacent to the site and the
closest resident located 0.1 mile to the south. An intermittent stream, River Gut, which originates north of
the site and discharges to the Caribbean Sea, borders the northern and eastern site boundaries.
 
The site has been leased to various chemical manufacturers throughout its history, including Island
Chemical Corporation on July 21, 1978 and Virgin Islands Chemical Corporation on September 14, 1984.
The facility was used for the manufacture of pharmaceutical chemicals. Virgin Islands Chemical produced
benzyl acetate, which is used in perfumes, flavorings, resins, lacquers, polishes, printing inks, and varnish
removers. In 1985, Virgin Islands Chemical also began producing benzyl salicylate, which is used as a
perfume fixative, as a solvent for synthetic musk, and in sun screen lotions. The site is now inactive.
 
In conjunction with the sale of the assets of Island Chemical to Virgin Islands Chemical in September
1984, Island Chemical hired a consultant to conduct an investigation of the site. Three areas of concern
were identified during this investigation, including an 8,000-gallon process pit, the associated drainage line
from the pit to River Gut, and contaminated soil at various areas on site. Soil samples collected between
September 1984 and March 1986 indicated the presence of various organic compounds, including
elevated levels of toluene and pyridine. Two separate Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
enforcement inspections were conducted at the site, on September 9, 1985 and on March 13, 1986,
in order to verify the effectiveness of soil remediation and to determine RCRA compliance. Results of
samples taken during these inspections indicated the presence of phthalates, benzene, chloroform, and
polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons, along with chromium and zinc. Toluene concentrations were within
acceptable limits.
 
On January 31 and February 1, 1989, EPA conducted a preliminary assessment, site inspection, and
removal site evaluation. At that time the laboratory/warehouse building contained approximately 400
drums, some extremely deteriorated, leaking cylinders of chlorine and hydrogen chloride, and over 800
containers of laboratory reagents that included sodium metal, potassium cyanide, and ethyl ether. EPA
removed 205 55-gallon drums, 40 85-gallon drums, and nine 5-gallon drums of various chemicals, and
8,061 pounds of chemicals from the laboratory/warehouse building. EPA also collected samples from an
on-site well and from nearby public supply wells. The results of these samples showed concentrations
of chloroform present in the ground water in the area of the site. During a 1986 RCRA inspection of the
facility, four empty 55-gallon drums that had contained chloroform were found. In 1989, EPA discovered
one 55-gallon drum and one 4-liter bottle of chloroform onsite. EPA conducted a sampling site inspection
at the facility on February 28, 1991, during which ground water, sediment, and soil samples were collected.
Chloroform was found in high concentrations in the on-site wells. In addition, analyses of sediment
samples collected from on-site storm drains indicated elevated levels of various organic and inorganic
contaminants. Analysis of on-site soil and sediment samples also indicated the presence of a number of
pesticides.
 
Status (June 1996) : In September 1994, EPA and Island Chemical entered into an Administrative Order
on Consent requiring the company to conduct a remedial investigation and feasibility study for the site.
Field work conducted by Island Chemical began in January 1995 and continued through November 1995.
A second phase of the field work will begin in the Spring of 1996.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
