NPL Site Narrative for Islip Municipal
Sanitary Landfill
 
ISLIP MUNICIPAL SANITARY LANDFILL
Islip, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Islip Municipal Sanitary landfill covers approximately
65 acres on Blydenburgh Road in the Town of Islip, Suffolk County, New York. The surrounding area is
entirely residential except for a golf course immediately east of the landfill. The site is also known as the
Blydenburgh Road Landfill. The town has operated the landfill since 1957. It has a permit from the State to
accept municipal wastes.
 
In early 1978, the State filed an Administrative Complaint against Hickey Carting Co. A hearing was
conducted which concluded that in June 1978 Hickey Carting had disposed of approximately 50 or more
55-gallon drums containing a mixture of tetrachloroethylene and other liquids at the site. The drums
were buried in the highest (southeastern) part of the site. In May 1979, the New York Commissioner of
Environmental Conservation adopted the findings of the hearing and fined Hickey Carting $4,000.
 
According to tests conducted by the Suffolk County Health Department in 1980, private wells adjacent to
the landfill are contaminated with tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethane, trichloroethylene, and vinyl chloride.
An estimated 75,000 people draw drinking water from Suffolk County Water Authority wells and numerous
private wells, all within 3 miles of the landfill.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : On May 12, 1987, an Administrative Order was signed by the Town of Islip,
the Islip Resource Recovery Agency, and the State. The order calls for a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action. Field work started in September 1988. Most of the air sampling has been completed. The remedial
investigation report is expected to be completed in mid-1992.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
