NPL Site Narrative for J.H. Baxter & Co.
 
J.H. BAXTER & CO.
Weed, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : J.H. Baxter Co. has owned and operated a wood-treatment
facility at the base of Mount Shasta in Weed, Siskiyou County, California, since 1962. Prior to 1962, the
plant was owned and operated by Long Bell Lumber Co. and International Paper Co. Roseburg Forest
Products Co. owns and operates a lumber products facility adjacent to Baxter.
 
The chemicals used to treat wood include pentachlorophenol, arsenic compounds, and creosote. Analyses
conducted by the company and the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB) detected
arsenic, polynuclear aromatics, and pentachlorophenol in ground water beneath the site. Heavy metals,
pentachlorophenol, tetrachlorophenol, and creosote have been detected in surface water downstream of
the site.
 
CRWQCB issued the company a Cleanup and Abatement Order in March 1983 and a Cease and Desist
Order in May 1983. The company has installed monitoring wells and taken measures to collect and direct
rainwater run-off.
 
Status (February 1986) : CRWQCB ordered J.H. Baxter Co., International Paper Co., and Roseburg
Forest Products Co. to develop a site characterization study in accordance with a workplan developed
earlier by the companies.
 
In December 1985, EPA issued Notice Letters to the companies. In response, the companies agreed to
meet with EPA to develop a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the
type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Two units at the facility that were regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA) have been closed. EPA and the State are now trying to determine if the closures meet RCRA
requirements.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : EPA is proposing to place this previously proposed RCRA site on the NPL
because it has a history of unwillingness to take corrective action. Although Baxter has had Interim Status
since it filed part of a RCRA permit application on November 19, 1980, it has consistently sought to
withdraw that filing since 1983, and has continued to dispute RCRA jurisdiction over its facility. By these
actions, the company has shown itself to be unwilling to comply with numerous State and EPA Regional
demands for cleanup and/or closure under RCRA and other statutes. The company does not dispute that
soil and ground water at the site are contaminated; rather, it disputes the applicability of RCRA to those
problems.
 
Because it appears unlikely that corrective action can be achieved quickly under RCRA, EPA is dealing
with the contamination under Superfund. After lengthy negotiations failed with J.H. Baxter Co., International
Paper Co., and Roseburg Forest Products Co. over their conduct of the RI/FS, EPA started an RI/FS in
January 1987.
 
This site's score on the Hazard Ranking System, which EPA uses to evaluate sites for the NPL, has been
revised. Therefore, EPA is soliciting comments on the revised score.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has placed this site on the NPL.
 
EPA released the final RI report in January 1989 and is preparing the FS. International Paper, J.H. Baxter,
and Roseburg Forest Products are conducting treatability studies on soils and ground water. These data
will be used in the FS to evaluate remedial alternatives.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
