NPL Site Narrative for Jacksonville Naval
Air Station
 
JACKSONVILLE NAVAL AIR STATION
Jacksonville, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Jacksonville Naval Air Station (NAS) is in southwestern
Duval County, in Jacksonville, Florida. NAS occupies approximately 6 square miles on the shore of the
St. Johns River near the headwaters of the Ortega River. The area around the station is commercial and
residential. Since 1940, NAS's primary mission has been to provide services and materials to support
aviation activities.
 
NAS is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. As part of IRP, the Navy used historical records, aerial photographs, field inspections, and
personnel interviews to identify at least 40 potentially contaminated areas within the facility boundaries,
including landfills, storage areas, lagoons, and spills. Wastes handled include waste solvents, oil and fuel,
paint wastes, aqueous wastes containing heavy metals, acids, caustics, cyanide, paint stripper wastes
containing chlorinated solvents and phenolics, radium paint wastes, and waste from medical radiological
programs.
 
In August and September 1983, a Navy contractor sampled soils and shallow ground water. Contaminants
identified included trichloroethylene, 1,1-dichloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, tetrachloroethylene, PCBs,
cadmium, chromium, lead, copper, and mercury. The potential exists for contaminated ground water to
migrate off-site and endanger local water supplies. Private wells into shallow ground water within 3 miles of
hazardous substances at the station provide drinking water to an estimated 300 people.
 
Hazardous waste was deposited directly into the St. Johns River on NAS. A 1986 IRP report indicates
that lead, chromium, and cadmium were found in the river, which is used for recreational activities within 3
miles downstream of NAS. Fresh water wetlands and critical habitats for the Florida manatee and the bald
eagle, both designated as endangered species by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, are on NAS.
 
The Navy has taken interim measures to control run-off of oil and solvents from the old main dump into
St. Johns River. The Navy also plans further investigation of releases of hazardous substances and their
migration under a permit issued under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and
incorporating corrective action.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : IRP activities continue.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
