NPL Site Narrative for Jackson Steel
 
JACKSON STEEL
Mineola, North Hempstead, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 22, 1999) : The Jackson Steel site is an inactive "roll form metal
shapes" manufacturing facility located in Mineola/North Hempstead, Nassau County, New York. It is
not known when Jackson Steel began operating; however, they submitted a form/application to the
Nassau County Health Department on October 19, 1977. Jackson Steel reportedly ceased operations at
the site in April 1991. Degreasers, including tetrachloroethylene (also referred to as perchloroethylene
(PCE)), trichloroethylene (TCE), and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (TCA), were used at the site until March 1985.
Degreasing sludge was stored in drums on a paved area located southwest of the building. The site
property is bordered to the northwest by First Street, to the northeast by an apartment building, to the
southeast by a billiard parlor and an electronics store, and to the southwest by a paved parking area, law
offices, and a bar/restaurant. The site is located on the edge of a mixed-use area, with commercial and
industrial properties located to the south and west and residential properties located to the north and east.
 
The Nassau County Department of Health conducted numerous inspections of the Jackson Steel site
between 1979 and 1996; improper spill control at the waste storage area was noted once, in 1981, during
the period when degreasers were used on site. A Limited Phase II Assessment of the Jackson Steel site
was performed in December 1991. During this inspection, a third dry well was observed in the building, in
the loading dock. Soil samples collected beneath the dry wells indicated the presence of PCE, TCE, 1,1,1-
TCA, 1,2-dichloroethylene (DCE), and 1,1-dichloroethane (DCA) at depths up to 17 feet below ground
surface. 1,2-DCE is a degradation product of TCE and PCE and 1,1-DCA is a breakdown product of PCE,
TCE, and 1,1,1-TCA.
 
A reconnaissance of the site was conducted in November 1992 as part of an Environmental Site
Investigation (ESI). Numerous stained areas and puddles were observed in the building. Drums containing
petroleum products were stored in the building and on the paved area. The dry wells were partially filled
with liquid and a 275-gallon degreasing tank was observed "in close proximity" to the dry well located in the
loading dock. Between December 1992 and February 1993, numerous samples were collected in, around,
and below the dry wells and nine ground water samples at the site. The analytical results reportedly
indicated the presence of PCE, TCE, 1,1,1-TCA, and 1,2-DCE at depths up to 40 feet below the ground
level and PCE, TCE, 1,1,1-TCA, 1,2-DCE, and 1,1-DCA in ground water collected from monitoring wells
located downgradient of the dry wells.
 
The ESI report suggests that a release of PCE, TCE, and 1,1,1-TCA to ground water has occurred from
the site. Drinking water within 4 miles of the site is derived from public/municipal supply wells screened
in the Upper Glacial, Magothy, and Lloyd Aquifers. The nearest well drawing from the aquifer of concern
is located approximately 3,100 feet south and side-gradient to the site. Potable wells within 4 miles of the
site, and drawing from the aquifer of concern, serve over 300,000 people.
 
Status (February 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
