NPL Site Narrative for Jacksonville
Municipal Landfill
 
JACKSONVILLE MUNICIPAL LANDFILL
Jacksonville, Arkansas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Jacksonville Municipal Landfill covers approximately 80
acres on Graham Road in Jacksonville, Arkansas, just inside the Lonoke County line. The city purchased
the site in June 1960 and operated it as a municipal landfill until 1973. It had no permit and kept no records
of the wastes it accepted. The landfill closed when the Arkansas Department of Pollution Control and
Ecology turned down an application for a permit.
 
According to a former county employee, wastes were at first burned, prompting citizen complaints about
odors. Later, wastes were dumped into unlined trenches as deep as 25 feet. No cover was applied at the
end of the day. In addition to municipal waste, the landfill accepted drums of industrial and chemical waste.
 
On-site soil and the drums are contaminated with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo (p) dioxin, PCB-1260, 4,4-
DDT, and heptachlor epoxide, according to EPA tests. During an inspection in 1983, EPA observed about
20 rusting drums and a strong chemical odor. As many as 1,000 drums may be on the site. Until mid-1985,
access to the site was unrestricted, and children had been observed playing in the landfill. Drums had been
washed off-site onto neighboring residential properties.
 
Ground water is shallow (5 feet). An estimated 10,100 people draw drinking water from public and private
wells within 3 miles of the site. A private well is 1,320 feet from the site.
 
Drainage on the site is poor, allowing water to pond. There is no diversion system so that run-off can leave
the site. During heavy rains, the landfill floods.
 
In early 1986, the City of Jacksonville fenced the site to prevent public access.
 
The Jacksonville Municipal Landfill is within 0.5 mile of the Rogers Road Municipal Landfill, which is also
being proposed for the NPL at this time.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is planning for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
