 
 
OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch  Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2005 
JACKSON CERAMIX Falls Creek, Pennsylvania 
Jefferson County 5th Congressional District 
 
à Site Location/Size: 
 The Jackson Ceramix site is located at the eastern perimeter of Falls Creek Borough in Jefferson County. 
 
´ Site History: 
The Jackson Ceramix facility manufactured and painted chin a with lead-based paint from 1917 until its closing in October 1985. Lead-contaminated wastewater from the production process was discharged into an unlined drainage ditch and lagoon onsite. The wastewater contained a sludge that was white or gray in color. During site inspections, lead- contaminated sludge was observed throughout the draina ge ditch, lagoon, and wetland area into which the lagoon discharged. EPA and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) have conducted several removal actions onsite, which addressed the removal of drums, cont aminated soils, and discarded china waste piles; however, approximately 20 acres of wetland remain contaminated with lead.   
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 The contaminant of concern associated with the china production process was lead. The sludge generated from the china production process contained concentrations of lead characterized under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act as hazardous for lead toxicity. 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
 Approximately 20 acres of wetland have been contaminated with sludge containing lead in depths from nine to 12 inches, and an additional 20 acres of soil/sediment surrounding the sludge waste have been adversely impacted. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
PADEP has removed the discarded china waste piles along with the sludge remaining in the drainage ditch and the lagoon area. The excavated sludge from these areas was treated, stabilized, and capped onsite. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination.  See 56 FR 5600,  February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
 For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs.  ATSDR ToxFAQs can  be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
