NPL Site Narrative for Jacks Creek/Sitkin
Smelting & Refining, Inc.
 
JACKS CREEK/SITKIN SMELTING & REFINING, INC.
Maitland, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Jacks Creek/Sitkin Smelting & Refining, Inc., Site is in
Maitland in a rural/farming area of Mifflin County, Pennsylvania. Approximately 143,000 tons of ball mill
tailings containing lead and other heavy metals are stockpiled adjacent to the creek on 115 acres formerly
owned by Sitkin.
 
In 1984, EPA detected PCBs in soil on the property and lead and PCBs (Aroclors 1248 and 1254) in Jacks
Creek, which is used for recreational activities within 3 miles downstream of the site. Preliminary results
indicate that lead may be present in on-site ground water. The acidity of on-site soils may enhance the
movement of lead, which ordinarily does not leach substantially into ground water. The Tonoloway, Keyser,
Old Port, and Onondaga Formations provide water to private wells within 3 miles of the site, serving an
estimated 1,000 people.
 
The site is not completely fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact
with hazardous substances.
 
Sitkin closed in 1977 when it declared bankruptcy. Joseph Krentzman and Sons, Inc., purchased part of
the Sitkin property for a scrapyard. CIT Corp. and the Alabama Bankruptcy Court own the remainder.
 
Krentzman has submitted a proposal to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources to
remove the PCB-contaminated soil and encapsulate it elsewhere on the site. The company also planned
to dismantle the smelters and arrange for proper disposal. However, the company never carried out the
proposed actions.
 
This mining site is potentially eligible for cleanup funds from the State of Pennsylvania's approved program
under the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977. EPA is developing a policy for listing such
sites. This site is being proposed for the NPL at the time to avoid delay in starting CERCLA activities.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA is conducting a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site and will then negotiate with them to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
