NPL Site Narrative for Janesville Ash Beds
 
JANESVILLE ASH BEDS
Janesville, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : The City of Janesville, Wisconsin, owns and operates a 5.3-
acre ash filtration bed facility just west of its old landfill. The first bed was opened in April 1974. The bottom
of each bed is covered with fly ash, then industrial sludges, including paint and clarifier sludges, plating
wastes, and petrochemicals (during first 6 months only) are added. In theory, the sludge dries on top of the
ash bed. The sludge-ash mixture is periodically cleaned out and disposed of, first at its old landfill (which
closed in 1978) and later at its new landfill. From 1.5 million to 3 million gallons (7,500 to 15,000 cubic
yards) of industrial sludges are accepted annually. Limited amounts of leachate are collected to monitor the
facility's performance.
 
In February 1980, the State acted to require the city to seek a license or close the facility under the State's
new hazardous waste code. In October 1982, the city constructed three clay-lined ash beds to collect
leachate but must also satisfy other conditions to obtain a State interim license to continue to operate
for an additional 2 years. The city has started a comprehensive investigation of soils and ground water.
Preliminary results indicate both have been contaminated. All data available will be evaluated to determine
if additional remedial action is necessary.
 
Status (June 1984) : EPA has started a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes associated
with the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
