 
  
 
OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site***                                                                                                                                             Septe mb er 2014  
                 JARD COMPANY, INC.    B ennington, Vermont 
                Bennington County 
 
Site Location:  
Jard Compa ny, Inc. (Jard) is an 11.26- acre property located at 259 Bowen Road in the town of Bennington, Bennington 
Coun ty, Vermont. 
 
Site History: 
From 1969 to 1989, Ja rd op erated on  the prop erty as a manuf acturin g facility making small capacitor s, small no n-fluid 
transfor mers and sma ll mo tors. The property ha s r emain ed v acant since Jard ceased operations in 1989. 
 
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), which were used in the manufacturing process from 1969 to 1978, were found within 
the former building structure and soils on the property. There is also a contaminated ground water plume which begins on 
the Jard property and extends west parallel to the Walloomsac River (Roaring Branch) resulting in contamination to 
surrounding surface soils and sediments. 
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
The major contaminant of conce rn is PCB s. The contamination from the P CB -laden  soil h as p assed into the ground water 
beneath the property and has spread to surrounding properties. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
There are at lea st six residential p rop erties and a n ea rby wetland that have potentially contaminated soil, ground water or 
indoor air resulting from sources on the Jard prop erty.  
 
 Respon se Activities (to date):  
Three response  actions have been  perfo rmed at this site. In  1991, at the req uest of th e Vermont Dep artmen t of 
Environmental Conservation (V TD E C), the EPA removed ch emi cals  stored in d rums and  containers on site, removed 
contaminated  sediments, c leaned out floor d rains,  re mo ved  outside contamin ated soils with un acceptable leve ls of PCB s, 
and  installed  a perimeter fenc e a nd  secure d the building.  After a fire on Ma rch 16,  1997,  VT DEC  and  local of ficials 
requ ested th e EPA to look further into conditions at the site. The EPA conducted a s ec ond removal action to remove 
additional contaminated soil,  re-s ecure the building and repa ir the perimeter fen ce. In 2007, the VT DEC  again asked the 
EPA to look at the site b ecause of continued deterio ration  of the building and s ec urity fenc ing. At that  time, the EPA 
removed the  facility building and some heavily contaminated surf ace  soil a nd then put a di rt cap over the area of the forme r 
building to redu ce the risk of direc t contact with contaminat ed surfa ce soil.  
 
 Need for NPL Listi ng:  
The state of Vermont refer red the site to the EPA because the contaminated ground water plume is affecting n earb y 
properties  and wetlands.  Other cl eanup alte rnativ es were evaluat ed, but a re not v iable a t this time be ca use of the extent of 
contamination. The EP A re ceived a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
 
[
The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change 
as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these 
substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet 
at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
