NPL Site Narrative for Jasco Chemical
Corp.
 
JASCO CHEMICAL CORP.
Mountain View, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Jasco Chemical Corp. has formulated chemical products on a
2.05-acre site in Mountain View, Santa Clara County, California, since 1976. The site is bordered on the
northeast by the Central Expressway and the Southern Pacific Railroad, and on the remaining sides by
residential neighborhoods.
 
In January 1983, a citizen complained to the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB)
that the facility was dumping solvents at the rear of the site on a daily basis. CRWQCB requested Jasco to
install a monitoring well at the site to determine if ground water was contaminated.
 
Both ground water and soil are contaminated at the site, according to analyses conducted by consultants
to Jasco. Methylene chloride concentrations are as high as 142,000 parts per million in ground water, and
soil is highly contaminated with pentachlorophenol to depths of 20 feet. Contamination is believed to have
resulted from any of the following sources: an underground tank farm, two dry wells used for disposal of
storm water run-off from the roof and paved portion of the site, and a drain that discharges surface run-off
at the rear of the site.
 
The company is working with CRWQCB to determine the extent of the contamination and to prevent further
migration of the contaminants. In addition, the City of Mountain View closed nearby Municipal Well #17 in
1987, until the lateral and vertical extent of the pollution has been defined. About 333,000 people obtain
drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : Jasco is pumping and treating ground water to remove contamination. In July
1988, Municipal Well #17 was returned to service. In November 1988, Jasco excavated 550 cubic feet
of contaminated soil and transported it to a hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
