NPL Site Narrative for Jasper Creosoting
Company Inc.
 
JASPER CREOSOTING COMPANY INC.
Jasper, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (March 1998) : The Jasper Creosoting Company Inc. (JCC) site is located along
North McQueen Street in the northwest portion of the City of Jasper, Jasper County, in southeast Texas.
The JCC facility consists of an 11.26-acre tract. The site consists of a process area and a pole and lumber
storage area. JCC is an abandoned wood treatment facility that operated from approximately 1946 through
1986. Operations at JCC included pressure treatment of railroad ties and utility poles using creosote and
pentachlorophenol.
 
Known sources of contamination addressed in the Hazard Ranking System scoring package are tanks
storing wood process materials, specifically, creosote and pentachlorophenol (estimated 41,306 gallons);
a backfilled surface impoundment containing process wastewater (estimated volume unknown), and
contaminated soils associated with the process/treatment area of the facility (estimated volume unknown).
 
Ground water is the major pathway of concern. Chemical analysis of ground water samples collected from
on-site monitoring wells completed in the Jasper aquifer document the presence of hazardous constituents
found in on-site waste sources and are not otherwise naturally occurring in the environment. The Jasper
aquifer is the exclusive source of municipal and private drinking water in the City of Jasper. The primary
municipal drinking water well is located 0.7 mile downgradient from the JCC site.
 
Status (July 1998) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
