NPL Site Narrative for Jennison-Wright
Corporation
 
JENNISON-WRIGHT CORPORATION
Granite City, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 1995) : The Jennison-Wright Corporation site is located on a 20-acre
parcel of property at 900 West 22nd Street in Granite City, Madison County, Illinois. The area surrounding
the site consists primarily of residential and industrial properties. Operations began at the facility in 1910
and continued until 1989. The facility treated wood block flooring and railroad ties. Compounds used in the
operations included creosote, pentachlorophenol, and zinc naphthenate. Jennite, an asphalt sealer product
composed of coal tar, pitch, clay and water was also manufactured at the site.
 
Operations at the site began in 1910. Midland Creosoting Company acquired portions of the property in
1921 and 1926. Midland Creosoting Company conveyed and warranted their holdings to the Jennison-
Wright Corporation on January 29, 1940. The Jennison-Wright Corporation operated at the site until 1981,
when the property was acquired by 2-B-J.W. After acquiring the property, 2-B-J.W. changed its name to
Jennison-Wright Corporation. Neyra Industries purchased the Jennite equipment and continued the Jennite
process onsite. Operations at the site continued until the Jennison-Wright Corporation filed for Chapter 11
Bankruptcy in November 1989. An auction was held in 1990 to sell process equipment and other items.
 
Wastes generated during treating operations include waste and wastewaters contaminated with creosote,
pentachlorophenol, and related compounds. These wastes were disposed in two lagoons. After operations
ceased, wastes were left at the site in a railroad tank car, a buried railroad tank car, two above-ground
storage tanks, and two lagoons. Samples collected by the Illinois EPA during 1988 and 1991 CERCLA
inspections revealed that soils at the site and nearby residential soils have been shown to contain similar
compounds.
 
In 1992, Illinois EPA stabilized waste hazards at the site. This consisted of asbestos removal and
containment, removal and containment of contaminated material from the lagoon area, and securing of
drums in a building on-site. Currently, the Illinois EPA is conducting a non-time critical removal action at the
site that will address the tanks, the railroad tank cars, the lagoons, and the drums.
 
Status (June 1996) : The State has proposed a remedial investigation/feasibility study, but no action has
been taken due to a lack of funding.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
