 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (re lease) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances ide ntified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxF AQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq s/index.asp
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** May 2012 
JERVIS B. WEBB CO.  South Gate, California  
 Los Angeles County  
 
 Site Location: 
The site is located in a mixed industrial, commercial and residential area in South Gate, California.   
 Site History: 
The Jervis B. Webb Co. conducted metal fabrication, finishing, painting and assembly operations associated with the  manufacture of industrial conveyor belt systems from the 1950s to early 1996 on the southeast portion of the site. In 1997, Reliable Steel, Inc. purchased this portion of the site. The Jervis B. Webb Company  purchased the northwestern portion of the site in 1975 from Spear Industries. Blake Rivet Company, which produced aluminum and stainless steel aircraft rivets, leased the northwestern portion of the site until approximately 1981.   
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Trichloroethylene (TCE) has contaminated soil and ground water at the site. In 1997, TCE was detected in onsite soils at levels up to 270,000 ppb, and the contaminated soil was excavated, removed and backfilled with clean material in 1999. In 2002, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) issued a No Further Action letter for soil assessment and cleanup with the stipulation that ground water monitoring and investigation needed to be continued. TCE was detected in the ground water beneath the site at levels up to 3 5,000 ppb. The EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL)  for TCE in drinking water is 5 ppb.   
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The extent of the ground water contamination needs to be fully characterized. Although the drinking water supply wells immediately downgradient of the site are located in a deeper aquifer and are not currently contaminated, there is the potential that drinking water wells may become contaminated . There are at least 35 drinking water wells within four miles of the site, serving approximately 226,000 people. In addition, due to the high concentrations of TCE in ground water and the relatively shallow depth to ground water (60 feet), there is a need to evaluate the potential for vapor intrusion of TCE from the site into nearby buildings and residential areas.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
The RWQCB requested that the California D epartment of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) assume the lead on the Jervis B. Webb Co. site in 2007. The DTSC issued an order to the potentially responsible parties for the Jervis B. Webb Co. site to investigate and remediate the site, but no parties complied with the order. Since 2007, the DTSC has been unsuccessful in compelling the potentially responsible parties to conduct work at the site . Due to the lack of enforcement resources as well as the proximity of the site  to the existing Cooper Drum NPL site, the DTSC requested that the EPA assume the lead for the site  to ensure that investigation work continues and cleanup work begins.   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of California referred the site to the EPA. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated , but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State of California.    
