NPL Site Narrative for JFD Electronics/
Channel Master
 
JFD ELECTRONICS/CHANNEL MASTER
Oxford, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The JFD Electronics/Channel Master site occupies 13 acres on
Industrial Drive in Oxford, Granville County, North Carolina. During 1962-79, JFD Electronics manufactured
television antennas on the site. A lagoon covering approximately 23,400 square feet was built in 1964-65
to dispose of sludge generated by treating waste water, primarily rinse water from a chromate conversion
process and copper/nickel electroplating.
 
In 1980, Channel Master, a division of Avnet, Inc., purchased the property. In 1983, half of the lagoon was
filled and used as a truck parking lot. A building on the property is rented by a local department store and
used as a warehouse.
 
Approximately 25 percent of the property is contaminated, according to Channel Master. The company
found chromium, lead, and other heavy metals in the sludge, and halogenated organic compounds,
including trichloroethane, tetrachloroethylene, and trans-1,2-dichloroethane, in on-site shallow monitoring
wells it had constructed. This contamination appears to be associated with leaking underground tanks of
waste oil used by JFD and with an area where trucks with waste oil had been rinsed. An estimated 2,500
people obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site, the closest approximately 2,000
feet to the southeast.
 
The site drains to an unnamed tributary of Fishing Creek, which is used for recreational fishing within 3
miles downstream of the site.
 
Channel Master has contracted for several studies of the site. One study developed a plan for cleaning up
the lagoon and contaminated soil. The work started in June 1987 and is nearing completion.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : Channel Master has completed a partial cleanup of the lagoon.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
