 
   
   
  
   
    
   
   
   
  
   
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** March 2010 
JJ SEIFERT MACHINE Ruskin, Florida Hillsborough County 
Site Location: The site is located at 4202 to 4212 Old Highway 41 South in Ruskin, Hillsborough County, Florida. The site is approximately one acre in size and includes a machine shop building, a metal building, and a mobile home.   Site History: JJ Seifert Machine Company, which has operated at the site since approximately 1962, manufactures products such as electronic components, tools, dies, jigs and fixtures.  A paint shed, a drum storage area, and a plating operation formerly existed at the site.  The primary source of contamination in the ground water is a former tetrachloroethene (PCE) vapor degreaser, which was used to clean parts. Site Contamination/Contaminants: PCE was found in the surface and subsurface soils. PCE and eight other volatile organic compounds (VOCs) were found in ground water at concentrations above the EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs). The most prevalent VOCs showing widespread onsite contamination were cis-1,2 dichloroethene (DCE), PCE, trichloroethene (TCE), and vinyl chloride. Upgr adient ground water sample results confirm that the VOC contaminant plume originates at JJ Seifert Machine Comp any.  Ground water samples from several private drinking water wells immediately across the road from the site have been found to contain VOCs at concentrations above the MCLs. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: There are 28 private and community potable wells within a one-quarter mile radius of the site.  The surficial aquifer is unconfined and there are no municipal water lines in the area.  In the latest drinking water well sampling conducted in August 2008 by the Hillsborough County Public Health Department (HCPHD), VOCs were found in 12 residential wells. Response Activities (to date): Private well sampling in the area was conducted in Augus t 2008 by HCPHD.  HCPHD installed granular activated carbon filters at the 12 residences where contaminants have been found to be at concentration above MCLs or Florida Primary Drinking Water Standards.  HCPHD is currently providing maintenance of the systems. Need for NPL Listing: The State of Florida referred the site to EPA because the owner and operator of the facility have been unwilling to adequately address the contamination at the site and because contamination was detected in the private drinking water wells. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
