NPL Site Narrative for Joliet Army
Ammunition Plant (Manufacturing Area)
 
JOLIET ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT (MANUFACTURING AREA)
Joliet, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Joliet Army Ammunition Plant (JAAP) is a munitions
installation located south of Joliet in Will County, Illinois. This NPL site consists of the Manufacturing
Area, which occupies about 14 square miles of JAAP west of Illinois State Highway 53. More than 4 billion
pounds of explosives were produced in the area during its operating life from the early 1940s to 1977.
Since 1977, the area has been maintained in nonoperating standby condition by the contractor/operator
(Uniroyal, Inc.).
 
The Army has determined that extremely large quantities of waste products and waste waters were
generated during the operating life of the Manufacturing Area. Contaminated process waters and chemical
spills were routinely discharged to constructed drainage ditches, where they flowed without treatment into
Jackson Creek and Grant Creek. Unlined piles of incinerator ash and a leak in the liner of one of several
waste water lagoons have also contributed to contamination of ground water and surface water, according
to the Army.
 
JAAP is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search) and Phase II (preliminary survey). In the
course of the survey, the Army has documented releases to ground water and surface water of munitions-
related contaminants attributable to Manufacturing Area activities.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The Army is cleaning out the lagoons so they can be closed according to the
requirements of Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of RCRA. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore,
this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
