NPL Site Narrative for Jones Sanitation
 
JONES SANITATION
Hyde Park, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Jones Sanitation Site covers about 10 acres in a rural
area of Hyde Park, Dutchess County, New York. One owner operated the site from approximately 1956 to
1977, when a new owner/operator took over. From the early 1960s through 1979, industrial liquid wastes
and sludges generated by Alfa-Laval (formerly DeLaval Separator Co. of Poughkeepsie), a manufacturer
of mechanical separating equipment, were accepted. These materials consisted primarily of oils and
greases but also included acids, alkalies, solvents, metals from plating operations, pigments, phenol,
methylene chloride, chloroform, trichloroethylene, and naphthalene. About 77,500 gallons per month of
liquid industrial waste from Alfa-Laval were disposed of at the site between 1972 and 1979, according to
a report prepared by an Alfa-Laval consultant. The site now disposes only of septic waste collected by
commercial firms.
 
In the early disposal operations, wastes were dumped into long unlined pits in a 2-acre area. The pits were
dug to various depths; some were below the water table, which is 5 to 7 feet from the surface. Wastes
were allowed to seep into the ground through subsurface sands and gravels. When a pit was completely
filled with liquids, it was filled with gravel and abandoned. According to the Dutchess County Health
Department, disposal operations were poorly controlled, and as many as 30 pits may have been in use at
one time. Recently, the present owner excavated the pits and piled the contents on the ground without a
liner. The site is unfenced and within sight of a public road, making it possible for people and animals to
come into direct contact with hazardous substances.
 
The septic wastes presently being accepted are first chlorinated and the solids then stabilized in a pond.
The liquid passes through two consecutive sand filters. The effluent is again chlorinated and discharged
into tile fields on the site. Sludge remaining in the pond is composted on an asphalt pad on the site.
 
In June 1978, the owner/operator submitted an application for a permit under the State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES). The State denied the permit. A current SPDES permit application is for
subsurface discharge of septic waste. All applications and permits for sludge removed from the pond have
been submitted to the State.
 
On-site wells contain trichloroethylene, acetone, and other contaminants, according to tests conducted in
1985 by a consultant to the owner. At least 23 wells serving 9,500 people are within 3 miles of the site, the
nearest within 1,000 feet.
 
Surface water is threatened because Maritje Kill and associated wetlands cross the property about 375
feet downgradient of the disposal area. Surface water within 3 miles downstream of the site is used for
recreational activities.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
