NPL Site Narrative for Jones Road Ground
Water Plume
 
JONES ROAD GROUND WATER PLUME
Harris County, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 30, 2003) : The Jones Road Ground Water Plume site is located
approximately one-half mile north of the intersection of Jones Road and FM 1960 in a mixed residential,
urban/light industry area outside the city limits of northwest Houston, Harris County, Texas. The site
is being proposed to the NPL based upon the presence of hazardous substances, including cis-1,2-
dichloroethene (DCE), tetrachloroethene (PCE), and tricholorethene (TCE), in drinking water wells. PCE
has been detected in drinking water wells above EPA's Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) of 5.0 µg/L.
 
During a routine sampling of public wells by the TCEQ Houston Region Office in December 2000, PCE,
DCE, and chloromethane were detected in a public well supplying drinking water to approximately 18
employees, 90 children in childcare, and 150 to 200 students at a gymnasium. Subsequent samples
collected on January 25 and May 2, 2001 confirmed the presence of PCE, DCE, and chloromethane in the
public drinking water supply well.
 
During the Site Inspection in March and April of 2002, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) collected samples from 43 wells in Harris County and found concentrations of PCE at or above
the MCL in 8 wells. Concentrations of PCE in ground water samples were as high as 128 µg/L. As a result,
filtration systems have been placed on those 8 wells.
 
The source of the PCE, TCE, and DCE contamination is unidentified, though previous investigations
have suggested several potential source areas near the affected drinking water wells. There are
several businesses within the area that use chlorinated solvents. In June 2001,a Phase I Environmental
Assessment was conducted at Bell Dry Cleaners and leakage was discovered from a dry cleaning machine
at Bell Dry Cleaners into the storm drains. This facility is over 1,000 feet north of the public supply well
at the gymnasium. PCE and vinyl chloride was found in ground water and soil samples collected from
the Bell Dry Cleaners facility during the Environmental Assessment. On May 1, 2002, TCEQ initiated an
Emergency Order which directed the owner of Bell Dry Cleaners and the owner of the property to, among
other actions: maintain the current filtration systems; sample all wells within a half mile of the facility and
add filtration systems to any new wells with contamination; investigate and report on the nature and extent
of the contamination; and conduct any necessary further investigation. In May 2002, Bell volunteered to
stop using PCE. On August 21, 2002, an Order was issued affirming modifications to the May 1, 2002
Emergency Order. This ordered the facility and property owners to: (1) continue cessation of all use of
PCE at that location, (2) grant access for remediation, and (3) add a deed restriction to the shopping
center property that prohibits use of PCE. However, the owner of the facility and the property owner were
determined to be incapable of proceeding with remediation due to lack of funds.
 
Based on samples collected from March to December 2002, 228 wells have been sampled in the area
including and surrounding the Jones Road Ground Water Plume site. Of these wells, 23 wells have had
detections of PCE at or above the Environmental Protection Agency's Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL)
of 5 parts per billion (ppb). Filtration systems have been placed on the 23 wells with levels of PCE at or
above the MCL. Eighteen wells have had detections of PCE below the MCL.
 
Public and private drinking water wells serving residents, workers, and students have been found to be
contaminated with chlorinated solvents above MCLs and other EPA health-based drinking water standards.
 
Status (September 2003) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
