NPL Site Narrative for Katonah Municipal
Well
 
KATONAH MUNICIPAL WELL
Town of Bedford, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Katonah Municipal Well in the Town of Bedford,
Westchester County, New York, is a part of the Bedford Water and Storage Distribution District. This
well had provided nearly 50 percent of the drinking water for 6,150 persons on public supply systems in
Katonah and Bedford Hills. It is adjacent to the Muscoot Reservoir, which supplies water to New York City.
 
The County Health Department first discovered tetrachloro-ethylene, dibromochloromethane,
bromodichloromethane, and bromoform in the Katonah Well in December 1978, at which time it was taken
out of service. By January 1979, the possible sources of the problem had been traced to four nearby dry
cleaning establishments that were served by septic systems. The county worked with the owners to correct
the problems and remove the sources.
 
Several attempts at pumping the well to remove the contamination from the aquifer have proved
unsuccessful. In addition, the floodgates of the Muscoot Reservoir were closed to raise the water level
of the reservoir in the hopes that water pressure would impact the well field and dilute the concentration
of contaminants. However, after an initial drop, contaminant levels rose when the well was pumped to
simulate normal operations.
 
The county and State will continue to work with the Town of Bedford on a plan to reduce the concentration
of contaminants in the well.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : The Town of Bedford has installed new wells to provide the water district with an
adequate supply of water. EPA is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
