NPL Site Narrative for Kauffman &
Minteer, Inc.
 
KAUFFMAN & MINTEER, INC.
Jobstown, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Kauffman & Minteer, Inc. (K & M) transports bulk liquids in
company-owned tanker trucks from a 5-acre plot in Jobstown, Burlington County, New Jersey. The
materials transported are primarily synthetic organics, plasticizers, resins, vegetable oils, petroleum oils,
and alcohols. During 1960-80, water from the interior-washing of the company's trucks was disposed of in
an on-site, unlined lagoon. In 1981, K & M began to dispose of its waste water off-site. The lagoon has not
been properly closed. It has no retention pond to help control overflowing during heavy rain. In June 1984,
a dike surrounding the lagoon broke, allowing waste water to migrate off-site.
 
In September 1985, EPA detected tetrachloroethylene, toluene, ethylbenzene, styrene, 2-
methylnaphthalene, endosulfan sulfate, 4,4'-DDT, and phenanthrene in on-site soil. Ground water is
shallow (5 feet in some cases) and soils permeable, conditions that facilitate movement of contaminants
into ground water. Private wells within 3 miles of the site provide drinking water to an estimated 2,600
people and irrigate 4,000 acres of farmland.
 
The site is unfenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with hazardous
substances.
 
In March 1983, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection cited the company for operating
the lagoon without proper permits.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
