NPL Site Narrative for Kaydon Corp.
 
KAYDON CORP.
Muskegon, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Kaydon Corp. has manufactured roller bearings, ball bearings,
and various bearing assemblies since 1941 on a 40-acre site on McCracker Street in Muskegon,
Muskegon County, Michigan. Until 1968, waste water from plant operations, some of which involved
chlorinated organic solvents, was disposed of on-site in seepage pits and in the south branch of Ruddiman
Creek. The creek flows into Muskegon Lake, which is used for recreational activities, and eventually into
Lake Michigan.
 
In 1968, the wastes were separated. Now, only cooling water is discharged to the creek. Process wastes
are currently removed by waste haulers, discharged to the sanitary sewer, or discharged to two on-site
ponds. Waste discharged to the ponds is grinding sludge; the solids settle out and the water is piped to
the sanitary sewer. The pond sludge is periodically removed to a hazardous waste facility regulated under
Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). The sludges contain chromium,
copper, lead, and nickel, as does on-site soil, according to the company.
 
In October 1982, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources (MDNR), concerned about ground
water quality in the area, requested that Kaydon conduct a hydrogeological investigation. Chlorinated
organic solvents, including 1,1-dichloroethane and 1,2-dichloroethylene, and copper were found in 1985 in
monitoring wells the company installed downgradient of the site. Approximately 700 people obtain drinking
water from private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
In June 1986, Kaydon removed 1,500 cubic yards of contaminated soil and sludge and transported them to
a RCRA-regulated landfill.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : The company is cooperating with MDNR in cleaning up the site. Two wells to
pump contaminated ground water to the surface are in operation.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
