 
 
 
OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
*** Final Site*** May 2014 
KEDDY MILL   Windham, Maine   
 Cumberland County   
 
 Site Location : 
Keddy Mill is a 6.9 acre site located at 7 Depot Street in the Little Falls area of the town of Windham,  Maine.  
 
 Site History:  
Many industrial activities have been conducted on the Keddy Mill site between 1756 and 1997 including, a sawmill, grist 
and wool carding mill, wood pulp and boxboard manufacturing, steel and  fire suppression piping manufacturing,  and  a 
small machine shop and equipment storage. Several buildings on the site have been demolished, and the site currently 
consists of a single abandoned multistoried concrete building. The site has been vacant since 1997.  
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
The primary contaminant of concern at the Keddy Mill site is p olychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).  
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Contamination from PCBs is widespread throughout the site and inside the abandoned mill building. Rainwater run-off 
transports PCBs into the adjacent Presumpscot River, potentially contaminating adjacent wetlands. The abandoned building 
has been vandalized, which indicates that trespassers access the site. Potential contact with PCBs in surface soil and within 
the mill poses a health threat. 
 
 Response Activi ties (to date):  
Two cleanup actions have been performed on the Keddy Mill site by previous owners. The first involved the excavation of 
10.88 tons of petroleum contaminated soil in 1997. The second, during May and July 2010, was performed in accordance 
with a Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) Self Implementing Clean-up Plan (S ICP). Only a portion of the SICP was 
performed , which included removal of PCB-contaminated fuel oils in remaining piping and PCB-contaminated sludge, dirt, 
debris and oily materials from within the building. In addition,  the current owner has constructed a fence around the site at 
the request of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) to deter trespassers. 
 
 Need for NPL Listing:  
Investigation under a Brownfields grant by the town of Windham determined that the site was too contaminated to be 
addressed under a Brownfields program, and the state of Maine does not have the resources to address the site under their 
Uncontrolled Site Program. The EPA has received a letter from the governor of Maine supporting placing the site on the 
NPL.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change 
as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these 
substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet 
at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
