NPL Site Narrative for Kenmark Textile
Corp.
 
KENMARK TEXTILE CORP.
Farmingdale, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Kenmark Textile Corp. has conducted operations involving
manufacturing screens and handling and washing fabric in a light industrial area in Farmingdale, Suffolk
County, New York, since 1971. The 5-acre site, which is largely paved, is fairly flat. Over 500 residences
are within 0.25 mile of the site, the nearest 650 feet away.
 
An engineering report completed in 1973 by a consultant to Kenmark documented that ground water at
the site was in violation of ground water standards due to elevated levels of chromium. Wells are the only
source of drinking water for more than 10,000 people in the area. It was known in 1973 that wastes were
being discharged to leaching pits on-site. The wastes contained calcium, iron, zinc, copper, chromium,
nickel, and varying amounts of inks and dyes.
 
In 1979, the State issued a permit requiring Kenmark to treat its waste water before discharging it to the
municipal sewer. Kenmark is not meeting the discharge levels, and waste water contaminated with heavy
metals is discharged to leaching pools on-site.
 
In 1981, the Suffolk County Department of Health temporarily closed the company for illegal storage of
drums of hazardous waste. More than 50 drums containing hydroxide sludge are currently stored on-site.
 
The State is negotiating with Kenmark to treat its wastes properly, discharge them into the municipal sewer
system, and remove drums containing hazardous wastes.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Susquehanna Textile, a tenant at the site, has removed some of the contaminated
materials from the surface.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
