NPL Site Narrative for Kennecott (North
Zone)
 
KENNECOTT (NORTH ZONE)
Magna, Utah
 
 
The Kennecott (North Zone) site is located near the south shore of the Great Salt Lake. Magna, the
nearest town, has a population of approximately 17,800 people and is located south of the large Kennecott
tailings pond. Salt Lake City is approximately 15 miles east of the tailings pond. The site covers a large
area and sources of contamination include the 5,700 acre tailings pond, a slag pile, contaminated
residential soils in the town of Magna, and the refinery evaporation pond.
 
Kennecott Copper Corp., which owns the site (excluding portions of Magna), has operated a wide variety
of mineral processing and production facilities in the area since around 1900. The primary metal currently
produced is copper, mined south of the site at Kennecott (South Zone), which is also being proposed to the
NPL at this time.
 
Contaminants in the various sources include arsenic, chromium, copper, lead, selenium, and zinc. Analysis
of ground water monitoring wells have found high levels of arsenic and selenium. The principal aquifer,
which supplies water to the Magna municipal water system, underlies many of the sources at the site. In
addition, surface water analysis near wetlands shows releases of copper to the ditch near the large tailings
pond.
 
Current Kennecott activity in the North Zone site involves smelting and refining the concentrated copper
ore that has been mined from the open pit approximately 20 miles south of the site.
 
Kennecott is conducting an investigation in the area near the smelter to determine the nature and extent of
the contamination prior to constructing a new smelter.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
