NPL Site Narrative for Kerr-McGee
Chemical Corp. (Soda Springs Plant)
 
KERR-MCGEE CHEMICAL CORP. (SODA SPRINGS PLANT)
Soda Springs, Idaho
 
 
Conditions at proposal (May 5, 1989) : Kerr-McGee Chemical Corp. has produced vanadium pentoxide
in southeastern Idaho 1 mile north of Soda Springs, Caribou County, since 1963. The 158-acre site is in
a broad, flat valley near the western base of the Aspen Range. Significant agricultural crops in the area
include wheat and hay. A number of other large industrial complexes are in the valley, including Monsanto
Chemical Co., directly across State Highway 34 from Kerr-McGee. Monsanto supplies by-product ferrous-
phosphate solids, which Kerr-McGee processes into vanadium pentoxide. The Monsanto plant is also
being proposed for the NPL at this time.
 
Kerr-McGee's plant generates a number of liquid wastes and stores them in on-site ponds. The two largest
ponds hold over 12,000 cubic yards of waste.
 
On-site monitoring wells and the ponds contain vanadium, arsenic, copper, and silver, according to tests
conducted as part of an EPA site inspection in the summer of 1987. Within 3 miles of the site are public
springs and private wells that provide drinking water to over 3,000 people and a private well that irrigates
165 acres. The plant receives drinking water from an on-site well 375 feet from a contaminated well. No
unthreatened alternate source of water is available.
 
The topography in the area prohibits migration of contaminants to surface water.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1990 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
