NPL Site Narrative for Kerr-McGee
(Sewage Treatment Plant)
 
KERR-MCGEE (SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT)
West Chicago, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Kerr-McGee (Sewage Treatment Plant) Site covers
about 23 acres in West Chicago, Illinois. About 15,000 people live within 3 miles of the site.
 
In 1931, Lindsay Light & Chemical Co. established a mill called the "Rare Earths Facility" in West Chicago
for the extraction of thorium and nonradioactive elements from monazite and other ores. Later, the property
was used for the manufacture of gaslight mantles (which contain thorium), mesothorium, and, during World
War II, hydrofluoric acid. Ownership of the facility changed from Lindsay to American Potash & Chemical
in 1958 and to Kerr-McGee Chemical Corp. in 1967. Operations at the property continued until 1973, when
Kerr-McGee, the current owner, closed the facility.
 
The original sewage treatment plant was built in 1919 and included two septic tanks. Over the years, the
plant changed, and the tanks were filled with radioactive materials. In addition, fill, including radioactive
materials, was placed in other areas of the site. While modernizing the plant, the city has located many
surface and subsurface areas of contamination. To allow the modernization to continue, any areas that
obstruct construction are expected to be excavated and the material placed in a designed storage area on
the site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Because of an administrative error during the public comment period, EPA is
extending the comment period on this site for an additional 60 days.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : As modernization continued at the sewage treatment plant, Kerr-McGee
excavated contaminated soils and removed them to the Rare Earths Facility for storage. The Kerr-McGee
activities are voluntary, without EPA oversight or involvement.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
