 
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** March 2010 
KERR-MCGEE CHEMICAL CORP-Jacksonville, Florida JACKSONVILLE Duval County 
Site Location: The Kerr-McGee Chemical Corp (Kerr-McGee) site consists of approximately 31 acres located along the western shoreline of the St. Johns River in downtown Jacksonville, Florida. Site History: From 1893 to 1978, Kerr-McGee Chemical Corp operated as a fertilizer and pesticide formulating, packaging, and distributing facility. The site is currently vacant and undeveloped. Site Contamination/Contaminants: Results of site investigations revealed the presence of volatile organic compounds, semi-volatile organic compounds, pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, and metals at concentrations exceeding EPA cleanup target levels in the soils, ground water, and sediments.  Offsite migration of contamin ants has adversely impacted St. Johns River water quality.  Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Human health and ecological risk assessments have been conducted for the site.  The assessments concluded that workers and trespassers could be exposed to unacceptable cancer risk levels due to direct contact with the contaminated soil and ground water during onsite excavations. In addition, people ingesting fish caught in the St. Johns River or Deer Creek and those ingesting water taken from the surficial aquifer are also at risk. Response Activities (to date): Kerr-McGee Chemical began conducting investigation activities at the site in 1984, which were overseen by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDE P).  However, by 1998, Kerr-McGee had not completed the contamination assessment of the site to FDEP’s satisfacti on.  In April 1998, FDEP Northeast District filed a Violation Report against Kerr-McGee and in May sent a letter to EPA requesting that EPA take the lead on the site. In March 2000, EPA and Kerr-McGee entered into an Administrative Order on Consent (AOC) to conduct a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study at the site under the Superfund Alternative Approach.  Tronox LLC, the successor to Kerr-McGee, took over the AOC obligations in 2005. Need for NPL Listing: The State of Florida referred the site to EPA because Tr onox, LLC has filed for bankruptcy and may not be able to fund the needed cleanup. Other federal and state cleanup progr ams were evaluated, but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
