NPL Site Narrative for Keystone Sanitation
Landfill
 
KEYSTONE SANITATION LANDFILL
Union Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : The Keystone Sanitation Landfill is an active 40-acre landfill
located in Union Township, Adams County, Pennsylvania. It is currently permitted by the State to receive
municipal waste and industrial/construction debris. It has been privately owned and operated since 1966.
 
According to tests conducted by EPA and the State, ground water on and off the site has been
contaminated by various organic and inorganic pollutants, including trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene,
chromium, and lead. The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER) continues to
monitor the site, and the owner has voluntarily begun remedial actions. He is pumping ground water to the
surface and removing the volatile organic compounds by treating the water through an aeration process.
The owner is also conducting a hydrogeologic evaluation of the site. Maryland is monitoring the possible
impacts from the site, as it is close to the Maryland/Pennsylvania border.
 
About 1,700 people draw drinking water from private wells or springs that tap the contaminated aquifer
within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : PA DER and Keystone Sanitation Landfill are negotiating an agreement for the
company to study on-site contamination. EPA is planning for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of off-site contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
