 
 OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
  N ATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)   
***Final Site***                                                                        Dec ember 2013 
KEYSTONE CORRIDOR GROUND WATER CONTAMINATI
ON  Indianapolis, Indiana Marion County
  
 
 Site Location: The Keystone Corridor Ground Water Contamination site is a chlorinated solvent plume located in Indianapolis, Indiana.   Site History: Investigations by Indiana Department of Environmental Management could not determine any one specific source or sources of contamination due to the complex geology and the number of potential sources. Forty known users or handlers of solvents have been identified as possible sources. Individual plumes are comingled and cannot be distinguished among contaminants or sorted for attribution due to the complex geology.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: The ground 
water plume consists of chlorinated solvents, including tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2-DCE) and vinyl chloride.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Five municipal wells have had historical detections of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). In one of the five wells, vinyl chloride has been detected above its Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL). Over 13,844 people use the drinking water from these five wells. The local water company continues to monitor and blend the water before distributing to the public.   Respon
se Activities (to date): There is an ongoing removal action at Tuchman Cleaners, a nearby former industrial dry cleaning facility. Approximately 29,850,000 gallons of water were pumped and treated from the contaminated aquifer from December 1995 to December 2002 at Tuchman Cleaners. One municipal well has been taken out of production due to its proximity to the path of the plume. The EPA is installing vapor mitigation systems at residential properties that are above screening levels.   Need for NPL Listing: The site poses a risk to the community due to actual and potential contamination in municipal wells and in several monitoring wells. NPL listing would allow for proper and timely investigation of the nature and extent of the contamination of the potential sources, and enable the EPA to determine cleanup alternatives in order to protect human health and the environment. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The state has provided a letter of support for listing. 
 
         [The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at  http://www.atsd
r.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
