NPL Site Narrative for Kin-Buc Landfill
 
KIN-BUC LANDFILL
Edison Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : Kin-Buc Landfill covers 20 acres in Edison Township, Middlesex
County, New Jersey. It accepted 70 million gallons of various industrial wastes from about 1971 through
1976, when the State revoked its permit. Oil heavily laden with PCBs accumulates in a natural depression
called "Pool C" adjacent to the landfill and then discharges into Edmund's Creek, a tributary of the Raritan
River. The pond also holds aqueous leachate that contains chlorinated organic compounds and is believed
to be coming from the landfill. Ground water is contaminated. As a result of Federal enforcement action,
the owner capped the fill with a clay/synthetic cover.
 
In February 1980, EPA started to collect leachate in Pool C, with funds provided initially under Section 311
of the Clean Water Act and later under CERCLA.
 
Status (July 1983) : A Superfund State Contract signed with New Jersey in July 1982 approved about $3
million to (1) design, construct, and operate an interim collection/treatment system, (2) dispose off-site of
the drums of wastes collected and stored on-site, and (3) prepare a feasibility study to identify alternatives
for long-term remedial action. In September 1982, the owner took over operation of the Pool C collection
system from EPA.
 
The Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, is continuing a Federal civil action seeking injunctive relief
against parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
