 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** April 2006 
KLAU/BUENA VISTA MINE San Luis Obispo County, California 
San Luis Obispo County 22nd Congressional District 
 
à Site Location/Size: 
The Klau/Buena Vista Mine is located in San Luis Obispo County,  approximately 12 miles west of Paso Robles, California. The Klau/Buena Vista Mine consists of two ab andoned mercury mine sites (Klau and Buena Vi sta) that are located on adjacent properties on a northwest-southeast trending ridge of th e Santa Lucia Range in the California coastal mountains. They share the same owner ship, nature of operations and source types, targ et populations, aquifers, and water bodies.  
 
´ Site History: 
 Mercury mining and ore processing operations occurred at the Bu ena Vista Mine and adjacent Klau Mine between 1868 and 1970. 
Buena Vista Mines, Inc., has owned the Buena Vista Mine since at least 1957 and the Klau Mine since at least 1964.  
At the Buena Vista Mine, tailings were deposited in a drainage ch annel on the Buena Vista Mine property next to the North Fork 
of Las Tablas Creek. Other sources of contamination at the Buena Vista Mine include, but are not limited to, the Bureau of Land  
Management (BLM) Reservoir Dam; tunnels, drifts, stopes, and ad its associated with the underground mine workings; an open pit; 
and the ore processing mill.  
At the Klau Mine, the main tailings pile is located on a hillside on the north side of the Klau Branch. The lower edge of the p ile 
extends to Cypress Mountain Road and to within a few feet of the Klau Branch. Other sources of contamination at the Klau Mine 
include, but are not limited to, tailings and overburden piles;  a pond covering approximately 2 acres (Klau Pond); a smaller po nd 
(Western Klau Pond); and underground mine workings. 
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 The most significant contaminant of concern is mercury, which h as been detected in downgradient sediments at concentrations 
more than six times higher than background concentrations. Additi onally, arsenic and thallium have been detected onsite in easi ly-
eroded material at concentrations that exceed EPA’s Preliminar y Remediation Goals for industrial soils. Drainage from the mine has 
been reported as very acidic. The predominant hazardous substan ces in acid mine drainage from the site are iron and manganese, with 
aluminum, boron, mercury, nickel, selenium, thallium, and zinc also being reported at concentrations exceeding the California C entral 
Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) waste discharge requirements. Analytical data has shown that runoff water 
contains concentrations of mercury and thallium in excess of Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs).  
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Mercury mining and ore processing has resulted in mercury c ontamination to nearby surface water bodies and significant bioaccumulation of mercury in several fish species. Several impa cted surface water bodies are known to be used as major recreat ional areas and fisheries by local people and tourists. Additionally, the Nacimiento Reservoir is used as a direct source of drinking water by some lakeshore residents. Construction is set to begin in 2009 on a project to provide drinking water directly from Lake Nacimi ento to approximately 110,000 residents in San Luis Obispo County.  
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
 In 1999, the RWQCB requested that the EPA Region 9 Emerge ncy Response Office (ERO) assist in preventing the continued release of mercury-laden sediments from the site. In 2000, EPA removed 120,000 cubic yards of contaminated materials from the drainage channel and secured it in an onsite repository to prevent immediate threats to human health and the environment. Subst antial site stabilization work was also conducted. These actions have re duced acid mine drainage and metals discharge into Las Tablas Creek, but uncontained contamination rema ins both on and off the site.  In 2002-2003, EPA stabilized a sinkhole on site. In 200 5, EPA stabilized a slope failure on site. Contaminated materials stored  onsite are temporarily capped and will be addressed in the site’s long- term cleanup.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
