NPL Site Narrative for Koppers Co., Inc.
(Newport Plant)
 
KOPPERS CO., INC. (NEWPORT PLANT)
Newport, Delaware
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 26, 1989) : Koppers Co., Inc., operated a wood preserving plant
from 1940 to 1971 on a 317-acre site at the corner of Water Street and Jones Street in Newport, New
Castle County, Delaware. The site is bounded by rivers, creeks, and the Newport plant of E.I. du Pont de
Nemours & Co., Inc.
 
In 1971, Koppers sold the site to Dupont. As part of the sales agreement, Koppers removed chemicals in
the process tanks. Dupont removed all structures from the site, which is now vacant.
 
The treatment process Koppers used consisted of loading railroad ties and telephone poles into cylinders
and pressure injecting them with creosote or a mixture of No. 2 fuel oil and pentachlorophenol. In the
treatment area were a pond filled with water used for fire protection and a sump where any effluent from
the treatment process was collected.
 
In December 1984, EPA detected polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons such as benzo(a)anthracene,
pyrene, fluoranthene, chrysene, and benzo(a)pyrene, in on-site soil, pond sediments, and nearby creek
sediments. These compounds are constituents of creosote.
 
Ground water is the most important source of drinking water in the area. The Artesian Water Co. draws
drinking water from three wells within 3 miles of the site and blends it with other water to serve its 150,000
customers. The wells tap the Lower Potomac Formation, which consists of permeable deposits and is
hydraulically connected to the overlying Columbia Formation, permitting water to move between them.
 
Wetlands are present both on the site and bordering the site.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA has notified parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the
site of their potential liabilities. EPA is investigating the possibility of those parties performing a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
