NPL Site Narrative for Koppers Co., Inc.
(Texarkana Plant)
 
KOPPERS CO., INC. (TEXARKANA PLANT)
Texarkana, Texas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Koppers Co., Inc., operated a 62-acre wood-processing
plant in Texarkana, Bowie County, Texas, between 1939 and 1961. Wood-processing operations began at
the site in 1903. The processes used by the Koppers plant involved creosote, pentachlorophenol (PCP),
and zinc. The site is currently owned by the Bruce Kennedy Sand & Gravel Co., the Mt. Zion Missionary
Baptist Church, and about 78 homeowners in the Carver Terrace subdivision. Until recently, gravel and
sand were mined at the site. Open gravel pits filled with ground water remain in the southern portion. Oil
stains and seeps have been observed in these pits, which drain directly to Cowhorn Creek. Test borings
and analysis of samples by the State and Koppers have confirmed contamination of soils and ground water
on and off the site with PCP, zinc, and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons.
 
About 150 people depend on wells within 0.5 mile of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In October 1984 and February 1985, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds
to sample on-site surface soils. Based on results of these samples and under Administrative Orders on
Consent signed by EPA and Koppers Co., Inc., in December 1984 and July 1985, Koppers fenced the
southern half of the site and placed a "protective barrier" in the yards of about 18 of the residences.
 
EPA completed a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and
extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. EPA and Koppers signed an
Administrative Order on Consent in March 1985 for Koppers to conduct the RI/FS with EPA oversight.
 
All pre-field activities have been completed to EPA specifications, and Koppers is presently conducting the
field phase of the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
