NPL Site Narrative for Koppers Co., Inc.
(Morrisville Plant)
 
KOPPERS CO., INC. (MORRISVILLE PLANT)
Morrisville, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Koppers Co., Inc., Site covers 52 acres on Highway 54
West, approximately 1 mile northwest of Morrisville, Wake County, North Carolina. The site was used
as a sawmill until 1959, when it was sold to Unit Structures, Inc., which produced glue-laminated wood
products on-site. Koppers Co., Inc. purchased the site in 1962 and continued the glue-laminating process.
During 1968-75, Koppers used the southeast portion of the site for treating wood with pentachlorophenol
(PCP). Production of laminated wood continued until September 1986, when the plant was sold back to
Unit Structures. Koppers retained 10 acres of the original site where PCP was used.
 
Waste water from the PCP process was discharged to a pond on-site for the first 6 months of operation
and then to two unlined lagoons nearby. Koppers closed the lagoons in 1977. Liquid from the lagoons was
sprayed over a field on the northeast corner of the property, and the sludge was mixed with soil and spread
over the lagoon area in the southeast corner. In 1980 and 1981, Koppers found PCP in on-site soil, wells,
and pond water and sediment. In 1980 and 1986, Koppers removed some PCP-contaminated soil from the
lagoon area and transported it to a hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act. Contaminated soil remains on-site, however, according to tests conducted
by Koppers.
 
Ground water within 3 miles of the site is the primary source of drinking water for an estimated 2,200
people. The North Carolina Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Branch has detected trace
contaminants in some off-site wells.
 
Run-off from the northeast corner of the site drains eastward to an intermittent creek that flows southeast
approximately 2.25 miles to Crabtree Creek. Run-off from the southeast corner of the site drains to
Koppers Pond, which supplies water for fire protection. Intermittent overflow from Koppers Pond drains
south approximately 1,000 feet to Medlin's Pond, which is used for fishing and irrigation of garden crops.
 
The site is unfenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with hazardous
substances.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
