NPL Site Narrative for Koppers Co., Inc.
(Oroville Plant)
 
KOPPERS CO., INC. (OROVILLE PLANT)
Oroville, California
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : Koppers Co., Inc., preserves wood with chemical solutions
on a 40-acre site in Oroville, Butte County, California. The facility is partially situated on dredge tailings.
Both shallow and deep aquifers exist below the site and are connected. According to analyses done
by the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board, the shallow aquifer is contaminated with
pentachlorophenol (PCP), isopropyl ether, various polynuclear aromatics, copper, chromium, and arsenic,
all of which Koppers uses or has used in its processes. The Koppers facility has been contaminated by
chemicals spilled during treatment or storage of lumber over unpaved areas, as well as leakage from
underground piping. In September 1982, the State issued a Cease and Desist Order. Working with the
State, Koppers prepared a workplan, which identified the contaminated areas of the plant and proposed
actions to clean them up.
 
Status (June 1984) : In January 1984, PCP contamination was discovered in nearby residential drinking
water supply wells. Preliminary sampling indicates that this contamination may be a result of off-site
migration. Koppers is currently supplying the affected residents with bottled water and is formulating
a sampling plan to further characterize the extent of contamination. When the extent and causes of
contamination are defined, the State and Koppers will begin negotiations on the remedial action plan.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
