NPL Site Narrative for Kysor Industrial
Corp.
 
KYSOR INDUSTRIAL CORP.
Cadillac, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : Kysor Industrial Corp. manufactures temperature control
systems for the automotive industry on a 0.10-acre site in Cadillac, Wexford County, Michigan. The
process involves stamping and machining metal parts. Prior to 1979, 665 cubic yards of liquid/sludge
wastes containing solvents (1,1,1-trichloroethane, trichloroethylene, toluene, and ethylbenzene) used to
clean metal parts were disposed in unlined earthen pits on the site, according to the State. In 1981, the
company excavated the pits and sent the materials to an off-site disposal facility.
 
On-site monitoring wells that tap shallow ground water are contaminated with solvents, including toluene
and trichloroethylene, according to tests conducted by consultants to the company. A shallow aquifer within
3 miles of the site provides water for 4,500 people, approximately 8 percent of Cadillac's population. The
nearest surface water (0.4 mile downstream from the facility) is used for fishing.
 
A container storage area at Kysor received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA) when the company filed Part A of a permit application. In July 1984, EPA
approved a plan for closing the area and granted the facility small generator status.
 
Status (September 1986) : The State is conducting an area-wide remedial investigation/feasibility study
to determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action. The effort
includes several NPL sites, among them Kysor Industrial Corp.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : EPA is proposing to place this previously proposed RCRA site on the final
NPL. EPA's July 1984 action converted the plant to a hazardous waste generator. Hence, it satisfies a
component of EPA's NPL/RCRA policy.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has placed this site on the NPL.
 
The remedial investigation of the Cadillac area ground water, including the Kysor site, was completed
in August 1988 and the feasibility study was completed in June 1989. The proposed cleanup plan was
issued on July 27, 1989. This plan involves the removal of volatile organic chemicals from ground water
at the Kysor site and the removal of hexavalent chromium from the Northernaire Plating site, also located
in Cadillac, which was placed on the NPL in September 1983. The plan includes cleanup of contaminated
soils at Kysor.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
