NPL Site Narrative for L.A. Clarke & Son
 
L.A. CLARKE & SON
Spotsylvania County, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : L.A. Clarke & Son is the owner and operator of a wood-
preserving facility on 10 acres located on the outskirts of Fredericksburg, Spotsylvania County, Virginia.
L.A. Clarke & Son recently emerged from reorganization proceedings under Chapter 11 of the Federal
bankruptcy code.
 
Spills, poor housekeeping, dripping from treated wood, and other possible sources have contaminated soil,
ground water, and surface water at the facility with polynucleated aromatic compounds derived from the
wood-preserving agent creosote and with heavy metals, according to analyses conducted by EPA and the
State.
 
In 1982, L.A. Clarke & Son consented to a court order requiring remedial actions specified by the State.
The company was recently held in contempt of that order.
 
Waste piles and a surface impoundment on the property acquired Interim Status under Subtitle C of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) when the company filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Status (January 1986) : In December 1985, EPA began a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : This site is being placed on the NPL at this time because the potentially
responsible party declined to initiate work and CERCLA-funded remedial activities are underway. Thus, the
site meets one of the requirements of EPA's NPL/RCRA policy.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
