NPL Site Narrative for Lackawanna Refuse
 
LACKAWANNA REFUSE
Old Forge Borough, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The Lackawanna Refuse Site covers 258 acres in Old Forge
Borough, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania. In 1978, the State closed the privately owned site for
accepting industrial waste without a permit. One 5-acre strip pit contains 10,000 to over 100,000 drums of
hazardous substances. Wastes were also disposed of on other parts of the property, but it is not known
if they contained hazardous substances. Leachate flows from the site into an intermittent stream and
drainage ditches and into the nearby St. John's Creek, which flows to the Lackawanna River. Organic
vapors have been detected in the air near the 5-acre pit.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA recently completed a Remedial Action Master Plan outlining the investigations
needed to determine the full extent of cleanup required at the site. In summer 1983, EPA is scheduled
to start a remedial investigation to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site. It will be
followed by a feasibility study to identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
In 1983, the owners and operators of the site pleaded guilty to failing to notify EPA that hazardous
substances were disposed of, paid a $30,000 fine, and agreed to use the proceeds from any sale of the
land to help finance a cleanup at the site. They were also convicted on criminal charges in a State action
arising from operation of the landfill. The potential penalty associated with the State conviction is a fine of
up to $100,000, 4 years imprisonment, or both.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
