NPL Site Narrative for LaGrand Sanitary
Landfill
 
LAGRAND SANITARY LANDFILL
LaGrand Township, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The LaGrand Sanitary Landfill covers 5.6 acres in LaGrand
Township 5 miles west of Alexandria, Douglas County, Minnesota. The landfill received mixed
municipal refuse during 1974-85. The landfill was permitted by the State to accept mixed municipal and
nonhazardous industrial refuse.
 
In 1977, the original owner/operator transferred the permit and title to Valley Disposal, Inc. The landfill was
closed in March 1985 and was capped and seeded.
 
In January 1980, 140 cubic yards of soil containing 900 gallons of number 3 diesel fuel were improperly
disposed of, according to the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA). Analyses of samples by
the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) indicate that ground water on-site is contaminated with low
levels of volatile organic compounds, including chloroform, 1,1,2-trichloroethane, chlorobenzene, 1,1-
dichloroethane, and 1,2-dichloropropane. To date, the two nearest residential wells are not contaminated,
according to MDH analyses. Approximately 1,100 people depend on public and private wells within 3 miles
of the site for drinking water. A wetland is less than 1 mile downstream of the site.
 
The landfill has been in an almost constant state of noncompliance with solid waste regulations. In April
1983, MPCA and Valley Disposal, Inc., signed a Stipulation Agreement intended to bring the landfill into
compliance with its permit. Presently, the State and Valley Disposal, Inc., are negotiating a closure plan for
the landfill.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1987 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
