NPL Site Narrative for Lakeland Disposal
Service, Inc.
 
LAKELAND DISPOSAL SERVICE, INC.
Claypool, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Lakeland Disposal Service, Inc., formerly operated a 40-acre
sanitary landfill in Claypool, Kosciusko County, Indiana. The site accepted general refuse and hazardous
waste from 1974 to September 1, 1978, when it was ordered closed by the Kosciusko Circuit Court
because of improper operations. The landfill was permitted by the Indiana Stream Pollution Control Board
to accept municipal and certain industrial wastes from specific facilities. In 1975, the landfill received
approval for disposal of various industrial sludges, including chrome hydroxide, paint, zinc-selenium
hydroxide, aluminum hydroxide, copper-nickel-chrome hydroxide, and zinc-lead-cadmium.
 
On September 25, 1978, a new owner began subdividing and selling portions of the landfill to mobile
home owners. In 1983, the Indiana State Board of Health obtained a State court order requiring that
all development on the landfill be stopped, that homes be located elsewhere, and that the site not be
excavated in the future.
 
Tests conducted by EPA in July 1984 found cadmium, chromium, and arsenic in wells downgradient of the
landfill. An estimated 1,100 people obtain drinking water from wells within 2 miles of the site.
 
Sloan Adams Ditch runs through the site into Palestine Lake 2 miles away. The lake is used for
recreational activities. A 574-acre wetland is less than 1 mile downstream of the site. The wetland is a
critical habitat for the Indiana bat, designated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as an endangered
species.
 
The site is unfenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with leachate,
which EPA observed at the site during a 1984 inspection.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
