NPL Site Narrative for Lake City Army
Ammunition Plant (Northwest Lagoon)
 
LAKE CITY ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT (NORTHWEST LAGOON)
Independence, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Lake City Army Ammunition Plant (AAP), located on the
eastern edge of Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, extends over 7 square miles. Lake City AAP is
responsible for the manufacturing and loading of small arms ammunition. When the installation opened in
1941, Remington Arms, Inc., was the contractor. There are 11 residences on the grounds. These homes
and the plant are served by a series of on-site wells. The plant's 2,800 workers live off-site.
 
The facility has 38 past and present disposal areas, including 9 where the presence of hazardous waste
has been documented. At least eight of these hazardous waste disposal areas are no longer used. One
of them, the Northwest Lagoon, is the NPL site. It operated from the early 1950s until 1975. This lagoon,
approximately 50 by 50 by 8 feet, received about 900 gallons of hazardous wastes, including barium,
cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, silver, and spent halogenated and nonhalogenated solvents. The
lagoon has been treated, covered, graded, and reseeded. Heavy metals have been detected in an on-site
monitoring well, indicating that the closure was not adequate.
 
Another portion of the plant received Interim Status under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the Army filed Part A of a permit application.
 
The plant is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary survey) is underway.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Phase II activities continue.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of RCRA. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore,
this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
