 OLEM/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May 2018 
LANE PLATING WORKS, INC. Dallas, Texas Dallas County 
  Site Location: The Lane Plating Works, Inc. site is a former electroplating facility located at 5322 Bonnie View Road, approximately five miles south of downtown Dallas, Dallas County, Texas.   Site History: The site is a former electroplating facility that primarily conducted hard chromium and cadmium plating for more than 90 years. Electroplating was performed manually. Due to violations, investigations and bankruptcy filing, the facility shut down. Investigations by the EPA and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) found on- site soils and shallow ground water contaminated with plating wa stes.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: Cyanide, lead, mercury, chromium and hexavalent chromium are contaminating on- site soils, underlying ground water and sediments downstream from the site. Contaminant levels in on- site soils exceed the EPA Regional Screening Levels for residential and industrial use.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : The site is located near a residential area. On -site wastes include acids, bases, flammables, oxidizers, chromium containing solids (sludge) and liquids. Hazardous substances from the site have been released into on- site soils, underlying ground water, sediments and nearby wetlands. The Joppa Preserve and Lemmon Lake Park are located downstream of the facility. From 2014 through 2016, the EPA and the TCEQ took action to mitigate immediate threats by removing on-site liquids and sludge, however, the site needs long- term remedial action to clean up the contaminated soils, ground water and surface water.   Response Activities (to date): Large volumes of liquid plating wastes were stored at the site as recently as October 2016. In November and December 2015, the TCEQ removed cyanide waste and secured chromic acid sludge. In November 2016, the EPA removed all solid and liquid hazardous wastes.   Need for NPL Listing: The TCEQ referred the site to the EPA due to the need for long -term remedial action to clean up contaminated soils, ground water and surface water, and to prevent additional contaminant releases from the site. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Texas . 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices]   For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
 
