 
   
   
  
   
    
   
   
    
  
   
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2009 
LANE STREET GROUND WATER Elkhart, Indiana CONTAMINATION Elkhart County 
Site Location: Lane Street Ground Water Contamination is located at the intersection of Lane Street and County Road 106, Elkhart, Elkhart County, Indiana. Site History: In 2007, Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) and Elkhart County Health Department discovered highly elevated levels of trichloroethylene and ot her chlorinated solvents in a sample taken from a private residential well along Lane Street. Other ground water samples confirmed approximately 30 residential wells in the area were affected or threatened by the contaminated ground water. Site Contamination/Contaminants: The contaminated ground water is approximately 2250 feet long.  The contaminants of concern in the ground water are TCE, 1,1,1-Trichloroethane, Cis-1,2-Dichloroethane, Trans 1,2-Dichloroethane, and Tetrachloroethene.  TCE is a common industrial solvent used for cleaning machinery. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: There are approximately 30 contaminated drinking water wells in the area.  Eight drinking water wells exceeded EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level (MCL) for TCE. Response Activities (to date): After discovering the contamination, IDEM provided the residents with bottled water in August/September 2007.  EPA provided either point of use or whole house filte rs late October/November 2007.  In October 2008, EPA connected approximately 30 homes in the Lane Street area to municipal water.  All water main extensions were completed in November 2008. Need for NPL Listing: The State of Indiana referred the site to EPA because TCE ha s been detected in residential wells above safe drinking water levels. Other federal and state cleanup programs were ev aluated, but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
