NPL Site Narrative for Laskin/Poplar Oil
Co.
 
LASKIN/POPLAR OIL CO.
Jefferson Township, Ohio
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : The Laskin/Poplar Oil Co. Site covers 10 acres in Jefferson Township,
Ashtabula County, Ohio. It is an abandoned greenhouse and waste oil recovery operation. Liquids stored
in ponds and tanks contain heavy metals, PCBs, and other organics. The tanks and ponds have the
potential to overflow, leak, or collapse because of poor construction and maintenance. Any contaminants
released would enter Cemetery Creek, which runs adjacent to the site. The creek, a tributary of the Grand
River, is the source of drinking water for 24,000 Ashtabula County residents.
 
In late 1980, following a discharge of oil into Cemetery Creek, emergency response funds under Section
311 of the Clean Water Act were used for cleanup and containment activities. In early 1981, emergency
funds were needed to prevent oil from spilling into the creek. The cost of the two actions was $479,000.
 
The Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, brought a Federal civil action seeking injunctive relief against
parties responsible for wastes at the site. This resulted in a suit in 1979 under the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act. A Consent Decree in 1980 committed the company to clean up the site. When it did not,
$1.2 million in CERCLA emergency funds was allocated to eliminate the threat posed by two open storage
tanks and two large lagoons containing contaminated oil.
 
This site was once listed under the name "Poplar Oil Co."
 
Status (July 1983) : In May 1983, EPA approved $430,000 for a (1) remedial investigation to the type and
extent of contamination both on- and off-site and (2) a feasibility study to identify exposure pathways and
alternatives for remedial action at the site, outlining the investigations needed to determine the full extent of
cleanup required at the site. It will guide further actions at the site.
 
Status (August 1989) : EPA has dropped this site from the proposed NPL and is conducting a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action. The final remedial investigation report was approved in October 1985.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
