NPL Site Narrative for Laurel Park, Inc.
 
LAUREL PARK, INC.
Naugatuck Borough, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Laurel Park Landfill, operated by Laurel Park, Inc., covers
35 acres in a sparsely populated area of Naugatuck Borough, New Haven County, Connecticut. The
landfill is situated on top of Huntington Hill, a steep ridge about 1.3 miles southwest of the center of
Naugatuck. Since the 1950s, the landfill has accepted industrial and municipal wastes. About 12.8 acres
were permitted by the State to accept the wastes. About 200 tons per day were disposed of at the site. In
the early 1960s, citizens began to complain about odors, fires, spills, and run-off.
 
The maximum depth of the landfill is about 115 feet. The bedrock is shallow, and leachate is visible on
all major slopes at the landfill. Leachate sampling at the base of the refuse slope confirmed the presence
of toxic organic chemicals. In addition, various inorganic contaminants were measured in the unnamed
tributary north of the site.
 
This site was first listed under the name "Laurel Park Landfill." It is the top priority site in Connecticut.
 
Status (July 1983) : In September 1982, the State denied a request to expand the landfill.
 
EPA recently completed a Remedial Action Master Plan for the site. It recommends a $150,000 remedial
investigation before proceeding to the feasibility study. Alternatives in the feasibility study involve (1)
source control measures such as capping, leachate interception and treatment, and surface water
diversion and (2) off-site measures to provide a permanent water supply to residents whose wells are
affected or threatened, or to treat the water in the wells.
 
Enforcement actions by the State resulted in a Superior Court judgment requiring the owner to install a
leachate collection and treatment system by October 31, 1983, and a water quality monitoring program.
EPA has contracted for (1) an evaluation of the Court-ordered cleanup plan with respect to the National
Contingency Plan and (2) review of the report prepared by the site owner's contractor.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
