NPL Site Narrative for Lawrence Aviation
Industries, Inc.
 
LAWRENCE AVIATION INDUSTRIES, INC.
Port Jefferson Station, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 22, 1999) : The 124.6-acre Lawrence Aviation Industries, Inc. (LAI)
site in Port Jefferson Station, Suffolk County, New York is an active manufacturer of titanium sheeting
for the aeronautics industry. The company was founded at its present location in 1959. The property
was previously a turkey farm owned by LAI's corporate predecessor, Ledkote Products Co. of New
York. In approximately 1991, LAI indicated that its titanium mill was operating in a 200,000 square-foot
plant complex on a 160-acre site. The site is located on a topographic high point and is surrounded by
residential areas and a few commercial properties. The Village of Port Jefferson is located to the north.
 
LAI has been cited by the Suffolk County Department of Health Services (SCDHS) and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) for numerous violations. LAI wrote in February
1971 that liquid wastes from non-acid tanks were drained directly to the sump, which the company reported
to be 37,500 square feet. In August 1970, the owner of an adjacent property told SCDHS that the sump
occasionally overflowed onto his property, killing the plants. Samples collected from the sump in 1970 and
1972 revealed the presence of hexavalent chromium, nitrates, and fluoride at concentrations in excess
of permissible limits for discharge to ground water. In February 1973, LAI had used an earthen berm to
divide the sump into stormwater and industrial wastewater sections. SCDHS referred to the two separated
sections as the North and South lagoons in 1980, at which time both contained liquid and were receiving
discharges.
 
In 1980, the company crushed more than 1,600 drums and allowed the liquid contents to spill on
unprotected soil prior to drum removal. SCDHS interfered with the procedure to prevent additional drums
from being perforated. The drums contained trichloroethylene (TCE), tetrachloroethylene (PCE), spent acid
sump sludges, salt wastes, hydraulic oils, Zyglo penetrant, hydrofluoric acid, nitric acid, and other plant
wastes. SCDHS also observed numerous discharges from various plant activities to the ground surface
and to two unlined lagoons. SCDHS collected a number of samples and issued Notices of Violation to
LAI for the discharges. TCE was detected in liquid samples collected from the North Lagoon. Samples
collected from the North and South lagoons in April 1985 contained elevated levels of fluorides. The North
Lagoon was backfilled sometime after 1985. In July 1990, the NYSDEC Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act program discovered more than 2,000 drums stored on the site. Drum contents included
waste solvents, acetone, acids, oil, salty base, ink, and untreated acidic sludge, as well as numerous
types of solid waste. NYSDEC cited LAI for violating numerous hazardous waste regulations, and provided
oversight for drum removal in 1990 and 1991.
 
Ground water from the Upper Glacial/Magothy aquifer is the only source of water supply in the site vicinity.
From 1979 to 1997, TCE was detected in 11 residential wells located between 0.22 and 1.05 miles north
of the site. Residences with private drinking water wells located north of the site have been connected to
the public water supply to eliminate the presence or threat of exposure to TCE contamination. The drinking
water wells where TCE was detected are considered to be subject to actual contamination because
they were closed as a result of contamination from the site. There are 47 public supply wells, serving an
estimated 120,508 people, screened in the Upper Glacial/Magothy aquifer within 4 miles of the site.
 
Status (February 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
