NPL Site Narrative for Lawrence
Livermore Laboratory (USDOE)
 
LAWRENCE LIVERMORE LABORATORY (USDOE)
Livermore, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) covers
about 1 square mile and is situated about 3 miles east of the densely populated city of Livermore, Alameda
County, California. It was first used in the 1940s as a Naval Air Station. In 1952, it was transferred to the
U.S. Atomic Energy Commission and established as a nuclear weapons and magnetic fusion energy
research facility. It is now operated by the University of California for the owner, the U.S. Department of
Energy (USDOE).
 
Throughout its history, hazardous materials have been used, stored, and disposed of on the property.
Solvents, petroleum, and other organic chemicals used on-site have been found in the soils and ground
water both on-site and off-site. Sources of discharge of hazardous materials into the ground water at the
site include two known landfills where solvents and other chemicals were disposed of, as well as outdoor
storage facilities, underground tanks, and pipelines.
 
In September 1984, the California Department of Health Services (CDHS) issued an Order for Compliance
to LLNL to provide alternative water supplies to residents west of the facility whose wells had been
contaminated by hazardous substances from LLNL. The order also directed LLNL to conduct a ground
water investigation.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : In November 1985, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board
(CRWQCB) issued an order directing LLNL to investigate and clean up the on- and off-site contamination.
In response, LLNL has been investigating the source and the vertical and lateral extent of the
contamination of soil and ground water.
 
In 1986, a plume of ground water contaminated with volatile organic compounds, primarily
tetrachloroethylene, was found to have migrated 3,600 feet west of LLNL.
 
LLNL (with oversight from EPA, CRWQCB, and CDHS) is continuing to investigate the extent of soil and
ground water contamination at the facility. To date, LLNL has installed over 160 monitoring wells.
 
EPA is currently negotiating an Interagency Agreement with USDOE and LLNL to cover cleanup activities
under CERCLA Section 120.
 
LLNL has applied for permits under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
for an incinerator and for a new treatment and storage facility. To date, no other RCRA units have been
identified requiring closure or corrective action.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the RCRA Subtitle C corrective
action authorities. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this
Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
