 
  
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
*** Final Site*** April 2016 
LEA AND WEST SECOND STREET   
 
 Roswell, New Mexico Chaves County 
 Site Location: 
The site is centrally located near the intersection of Lea Street and West  Second Street in Roswell, New Mexico . 
  
    Site History: 
The Lea and West Second Street site consists of a ground water plume of chlorinated solvents from known and unknown sources in Roswell, New Mexico. The  sources include two areas of contaminated soil associated with former dry cleaning operations, contamination associated with a former in-ground concrete separator tank and a contaminated ground water plume. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Soil and ground water is contaminated with tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene, cis -1,2-dichloroethene and trans- 1,2-dichloroethene. These contaminants were found at concentrations greater than the Safe Drinking Water Act’s Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) within the alluvial ground water. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
More than 48,000 residents of the city of Roswell receive drinking water from ground water. This population is potentially affected by the contaminants related to  historical industrial site operations. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
In 2009 the New Mexico Environment Department  (NMED) removed an in-ground tank connected to the sanitary sewer system from one of the former dry cleaners tenant spaces . 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The NMED referred the site to the EPA due to the chlorinated solvent plume, use of ground water for drinking and the presence of geologic conditions favorable for migration. Without identification and investigation of the source of ground water contamination and remediation of the contaminated ground water plume additional public and private wells may be threatened. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of New Mexico . 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxF AQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
 
