NPL Site Narrative for Lee's Lane Landfill
 
LEE'S LANE LANDFILL
Louisville, Kentucky
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : Lee's Lane Landfill covers 125 acres along the Ohio River floodplain
in Louisville, Jefferson County, Kentucky. It first received waste in 1948 from domestic, commercial, and
industrial sources. Prior to and while the wastes were received, the site was a sand and gravel quarry. In
1975, residents living adjacent to the site reported flash fires around their water heaters. After explosive
levels of methane gas were detected, seven families were evacuated from their homes. In April 1975, the
landfill was closed. County, State, and Federal agencies documented the presence of methane and other
toxic gases in the ground east of the site. In 1978, extensive monitoring was conducted to define the gas
migration problem. A venting system was finally installed in October 1980.
 
In February 1980, about 400 exposed drums of hazardous materials, some highly flammable, were
discovered on the Ohio River bank adjacent to the landfill. Over 50 chemicals were identified, including
phenolic resins, benzene, and relatively high concentrations of copper, cadmium, nickel, lead, and
chromium. In October 1981, liquid wastes were pumped from the drums and taken to an approved disposal
facility. The empty drums, as well as solid wastes, were removed from the river bank and buried on-site.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA recently completed a Remedial Action Master Plan outlining the investigations
needed to determine the full extent of cleanup required at the site. It will guide further actions at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
