NPL Site Narrative for Lehigh Electric &
Engineering Co.
 
LEHIGH ELECTRIC & ENGINEERING CO.
Old Forge Borough, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 23, 1981) : The Lehigh Electric & Engineering Co. Site, in Old
Forge Borough, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania, occupies approximately 5.4 acres adjacent to the
Lackawanna River. The company operated a storage and repair facility for electrical equipment from the
mid-1970s until March 1981. On-site are 4,000 pieces of equipment, some contaminated with PCBs.
Analyses indicate that extremely high levels accumulated in the soil due to the indiscriminate disposal of
dielectric fluids containing PCBs. Contamination of ground water and surface water is possible because the
soil is highly permeable and the site is in the floodplain.
 
In April 1981, with funds made available under Section 104 of the Clean Water Act, EPA fenced the site
and analyzed soil and water samples. In September 1981, using funds made available under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, EPA started a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : In Phase I of the remedial action completed in December 1982, all
transformers, transformer contents, and surface debris were removed from the site. The RI/FS, completed
in 1983, included analysis of ground water, air, and river sediment samples.
 
Status (March 7, 1986) : In Phase II of the remedial action, completed in September 1984, contaminated
soils and buildings were removed from the site, which was then backfilled, graded, and vegetated.
Analyses conducted during excavation showed that the remedial action reduced the concentration of
PCBs in soils to 10 parts per million. Contaminated soils were transported to a disposal facility meeting the
requirements of the Toxic Substances Control Act.
 
In May 1985, EPA inspected the site, collected samples, and verified that the objectives of the remedial
action were met.
 
After the contaminated soils were excavated, the remaining soils containing low levels of PCBs were
buried beneath 10 to 15 feet of clean backfill. PCBs are not readily soluble in water so that any PCBs
remaining are not expected to impact ground water; no PCBs were detected in ground water samples
taken during the RI/FS.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under CERCLA has
been implemented, and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate. The Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources has agreed to perform all future operation and maintenance,
including the continued monitoring of ground water for PCBs.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
