NPL Site Narrative for Lehigh Valley
Railroad
 
LEHIGH VALLEY RAILROAD
Le Roy, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 28, 1998) : The Lehigh Valley Railroad site in LeRoy, Genesee County,
New York is the location of a chemical spill that resulted from a 1970 train derailment. The site consists of
portions of Gulf Road, the former railroad bed, and the properties adjacent to the crossing. The site is in a
rural setting, and the surrounding area is used for residential, recreational, and commercial purposes. An
intermittent stream, Mud Creek, is located approximately 500 feet to the southeast.
 
The derailment occurred at approximately 3:30 a.m. on Sunday, December 6, 1970. Approximately 1
ton of cyanide crystals spilled onto the ground. The cleanup included the removal of the crystals and the
overturned car. After the crystals were removed, neutralizers were spread on the ground to counteract the
effects of any remaining cyanide. Trichloroethylene (TCE) was also released from two ruptured tank cars.
A Genesee County Health Department (GCHD) engineer who was among the first people to respond to the
accident and a claims agent for Lehigh Valley Railroad each reported in February 1971 that approximately
35,000 gallons of TCE had been spilled. A geologist hired by Lehigh Valley Railroad to investigate pollution
resulting from the spill reported in March 1971 that approximately 30,000 gallons of TCE were spilled. TCE
odors were noticed eight days after the derailment in the basement of the Knickerbocker Hotel, which was
located 200 feet north of the crossing. Lehigh Valley Railroad tried to alleviate the odors by flushing the
chemical out of the surrounding fill sometime between March and June 1971. The response action involved
digging trenches near the crossing, pumping approximately 1 million gallons of water from a nearby quarry
into the trenches, and allowing the water to percolate into the ground. The owners of two private wells
located along Gulf Road east of the site noticed TCE in their water supplies about a week after the spill.
Approximately one month later, TCE was noticed in two other wells located more than 0.5 mile southeast
of the site. The TCE concentrations for samples collected from the affected wells in 1970 and 1971 ranged
from 4 parts per million (ppm) to 171 ppm. By November 1971, seven wells had become contaminated.
Lehigh Valley Railroad provided drinking water to residents with contaminated wells beginning in June
1971, and later provided the installation and maintenance of charcoal filtering systems at the affected
wells.
 
In September 1989, TCE was detected during routine sampling of the Genesee County Campground
well located more than 1.5 miles east of the site. Further sampling of private wells by New York State
Department of Health (NYSDOH), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) between 1990 and 1994 detected TCE in
approximately 50 wells located east or southeast of the site. In December 1991, EPA began installing
granular activated carbon (GAC) water treatment systems at 37 locations where TCE exceeded 5
micrograms per liter (&micro;g/L), the Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL). In October 1994, the NYSDEC
installed an additional GAC system at a residence exceeding the MCL.
 
NYSDEC completed a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) in 1997 that included a soil
gas survey, soil sampling, and a hydrogeologic investigation. The results of soil sampling conducted in
September 1992, December 1992, and October 1994 showed TCE concentrations ranging from 46 to
570,000 micrograms per kilogram (?g/kg); total 1,2-DCE concentrations ranging from 40 to 5,200 ?g/kg;
and cyanide concentrations ranging from 1.7 to 64.8 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) in soils collected at
the site. The hydrogeologic investigation showed that there is a source of TCE contamination remaining
in the unsaturated soil and bedrock at the spill site, and a ground water plume extending almost 4 miles
east and southeast of the site. NYSDEC issued a Record of Decision (ROD) for the site in March 1997.
NYSDEC selected ex-situ soil vapor extraction and bedrock vapor extraction as source control measures
and a water-line extension to provide a safe potable water supply to all affected residents and businesses.
 
An observed release to ground water is documented by the chemical analysis of ground water samples
collected from private drinking water wells in 1993 and 1994. Level I contamination (with a high of 3,100
ppb) is documented for 15 wells. Level II contamination is also documented for one well. The total
population served by private ground water wells within 4 miles of the site is approximately 2,515. The
bedrock aquifer is the only significant source of ground water for private wells in the site vicinity. The
bedrock aquifer is not used for public supplies within 4 miles of the site. The nearest public supply wells are
located in the Village of Caledonia more than 4 miles east of the site.
 
Status (January 1999) : The remedial design for waterline extension is scheduled for completion in
April 1999. Construction of the waterline should begin in July 1999 with completion expected toward the
end of 2000. The bedrock vapor extraction system is in the pre-design phase. Pilot studies have been
completed and the remedial design is scheduled to start in August 1999. The remedy for the surface soils
is excavation and treatment. The remedial design is scheduled to start in August 1999.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
