NPL Site Narrative for Lemberger Landfill,
Inc.
 
LEMBERGER LANDFILL, INC.
Whitelaw, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : The Lemberger Landfill, Inc., Site covers 21 acres
on Hempton Lake Road near the Village of Whitelaw, Manitowoc County, Wisconsin. The Township of
Franklin used the site, an old gravel pit, as an open dump from about 1940 to 1970. Lemberger Landfill,
Inc., operated the site as a sanitary landfill under a license from the Wisconsin Department of Natural
Resources (WDNR) from about 1970 to 1976. The State permit allowed accepting hazardous waste.
 
This site was originally proposed for listing under the name "Lemberger Fly Ash Landfill."
 
From early 1976 to 1977, Wettencamp and Brunner Excavating Co. transported fly ash from Manitowoc
Public Utilities to the Lemberger facility. An estimated 1,750 to 2,500 cubic yards of fly ash were disposed
of monthly. Past WDNR inspections showed that Lemberger used fly ash and bottom ash as cover
instead of burying them along with the refuse. Lemberger placed a second cap on the landfill in May 1981.
Leachate seeps are a problem of long standing.
 
In 1984, EPA sampled monitoring wells and leachate at the site. The analyses showed appreciable
concentrations of vinyl chloride, methylene chloride, and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene. Other contaminants
identified were ethylbenzene, toluene, tetrachloroethane, trichloroethane, dichloroethane, arsenic, barium,
total xylenes, chromium, cadmium, and lead. In addition, some of the same contaminants were present in
residential wells in the vicinity of the site, according to tests conducted by WDNR in 1984-85. Potentially
impacted water resources include the unconsolidated and bedrock aquifers near the site. About 2,300
people depend on public and private wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water. The
Branch River located 0.5 mile west of the site is also potentially impacted. It is used for recreational
activities. A marsh borders the southwestern portion of the site.
 
In 1982, Lemberger signed a Consent Order with WDNR that required the identification of the source of
leachate and the implementation of leachate controls, followed by ground water monitoring. Some drilling
and testing were completed, but further investigation came to a halt when the owner filed for bankruptcy in
1983.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA mailed general notice letters and information requests to 26 potentially
responsible parties in December 1985. Another site, Lemberger Transport & Recycling, Inc., Landfill
(added to the NPL in September 1984), is located approximately 2,000 feet south of the Lemberger
Landfill, Inc., Site. In November 1985, EPA similarly notified 21 potentially responsible parties associated
with the earlier NPL site. EPA is negotiating with the parties to have them fund a remedial investigation/
feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action. Negotiations between EPA and the parties will concentrate on
incorporating the two sites into a single study.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
