NPL Site Narrative for Letterkenny Army
Depot (Southeast industrial Area)
 
LETTERKENNY ARMY DEPOT (SOUTHEAST INDUSTRIAL AREA)
Chambersburg, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Letterkenny Army Depot is located 2 miles north of
Chambersburg, Franklin County, Pennsylvania. It was established in 1942 as an ammunition storage
facility. From 1947 to the present, operations have included the maintenance, overhaul, and rebuilding of
wheeled and tracked vehicles and missiles. These operations have taken place primarily in the southeast
corner of the depot known as the Southeast Industrial Area and in the East Patrol Road Disposal Area. The
two areas include about 170 acres. The operations have employed large quantities of chlorinated organic
solvents and cleaning agents. Wastes from the operations have been disposed of in the same areas --
by landfilling, burial in trenches, and spreading on the surface. This NPL site consists of the Southeast
Industrial Area.
 
Ground water beneath the Southeast Industrial Area of the depot, as well as beneath an off-depot area of
approximately 4,000 acres extending 2.5 miles to the east of the depot, is contaminated with chlorinated
organic chemicals, including trichloroethylene and 1,1-dichloroethylene. Approximately 40 residential water
wells have been contaminated.
 
Letterkenny Army Depot is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under
this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The U.S. Army has completed studies to determine sources of on-depot ground
water contamination, as well as a remedial investigation/feasibility study. The Army is currently supplying
16 residences with bottled water to replace contaminated wells.
 
Other parts of the depot acquired Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA) when the Army filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The Army has volunteered to install permanent public water supplies to residences
near the southeast area of the depot, including those in the area adjacent to the Southeast Industrial Area.
Installation is scheduled to be completed in the summer of 1987.
 
The Army has completed the majority of its investigation in the East Patrol Road Disposal Area and
Southeast Industrial Area, although some data gaps need to be filled before a remedial investigation/
feasibility study can be completed. Currently, the Army is developing field studies to test remedial action
alternatives in anticipation of the feasibility study.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of RCRA. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore,
this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
