NPL Site Narrative for Letterkenny Army
Depot (PDO Area)
 
LETTERKENNY ARMY DEPOT (PDO AREA)
Franklin County, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : The Letterkenny Army Depot is located 2 miles north of
Chambersburg, Franklin County, Pennsylvania. It was established in 1942 as an ammunition storage
facility. From 1947 to the present, operations have included the maintenance, overhaul, and rebuilding
of wheeled and tracked vehicles and missiles. These operations have employed large quantities of
chlorinated organic solvents and cleaning agents. Some wastes from these operations have been stored
and disposed of in the Property Disposal Office (PDO) Area by landfilling and spreading on the ground.
This NPL site consists of the PDO Area, which covers approximately 250 acres.
 
Ground water beneath the PDO Area and the surface waters draining the area are contaminated with
chlorinated organic chemicals, including chloroform, 1,1-dichloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, and
trichloroethylene, according to tests conducted by the Army. To date, no residential water wells have been
found to be contaminated by activities in the PDO area.
 
Letterkenny Army Depot is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978.
Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. The Army has completed studies to determine sources of on-depot ground
water contamination.
 
The facility received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the Army filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Status (April 1987) : IRP activities continue.
 
Status (March 13, 1989) : On February 3, 1989, EPA, the State, and the Army entered into an Interagency
Agreement covering comprehensive RCRA and CERCLA cleanup and compliance activities at the base.
Measures are being taken to control the sources of contamination in the PDO area.
 
This site was reproposed on July 22, 1987 to be consistent with EPA's proposed policy for placing on the
NPL sites located on Federally owned or operated facilities subject to the corrective action authorities
of RCRA Subtitle C. EPA solicited comments on the Hazard Ranking System score for the site, which
includes areas subject to RCRA Subtitle C corrective action authorities. EPA has finalized the NPL/RCRA
policy for Federal facility sites and is placing this site on the NPL under the policy.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
