NPL Site Narrative for Leviathan Mine
 
LEVIATHAN MINE
Markleeville, California
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 22, 1999) : The Leviathan Mine site is an inactive sulfur mine located
on the eastern slope of the Sierra Nevada in Alpine County, California. The mine began operations in 1863
for the extraction of copper sulfate for processing silver ore in the Comstock mining region of Nevada.
Mining operations ceased in 1872 due to the high sulfur and low copper content of the ore. In 1954, the
Anaconda Company transformed the underground workings into an open pit mine to extract the sulfur ore.
Approximately 22 million tons of overburden and waste rock were removed to get to the ore and placed
into and along the channels of Leviathan and Aspen Creeks. In 1962, the Anaconda Company sold the
mine to Alpine Mining Enterprises. The mine has not operated since 1962.
 
Infiltration of precipitation into and through the open pit and overburden piles creates acid mine drainage
that discharges directly into Leviathan Creek. Contact with waste piles directly deposited into the creek
has also contaminated Leviathan Creek. The low pH and high metals content of the acid mine drainage
have eliminated aquatic life in Leviathan and Bryant Creeks downstream of the mine. The release of acid
mine drainage from the site has resulted in fish kills in Leviathan and Bryant Creeks and the East Fork
Carson River, which is 10 miles downstream of the site. The creeks and river downstream from the mine
are historical habitat for the Lahontan cutthroat trout (Onchorhynchus clarki henshawi), a federally listed
endangered species, and cutthroat trout still inhabit the East Fork Carson River.
 
In 1983, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board approved a Pollution Abatement Project to
reduce surface water infiltration, collect and evaporate acid mine drainage, and isolate Leviathan Creek
from the overburden piles. To reduce access difficulties for the Pollution Abatement Project, the State of
California acquired title to the site in 1984 and placed it under the jurisdiction of the State Water Resources
Control Board. Due to space limitations at the site, the evaporation ponds constructed as part of the
Pollution Abatement Project have insufficient capacity to hold all of the mine drainage and the ponds
overflow during spring runoff.
 
In May 1997, the Washoe Tribe of Nevada and California petitioned EPA to investigate ongoing concerns
about the Leviathan Mine site and the management of wastes generated at the site. In the fall of 1997, the
EPA Emergency Response Office attempted to install an active treatment system to reduce the volume
of liquids contained in the ponds and thereby provide sufficient capacity to prevent overflows during the
spring of 1998. Due to equipment and weather problems, the system was not successful. During 1998, the
EPA's Region 9 Superfund Program negotiated an Administrative Order on Consent and oversaw efforts
by ARCO (successor to Anaconda Company) to prevent pond overflow. This effort was also unsuccessful.
During 1999, the Regional Board used State funding to treat 4 million gallons of contaminated water in the
ponds. State and Federal monitoring shows that Leviathan and Bryant Creeks continue to be devastated
by acid drainage of Leviathan Mine from sources other than the pond overflow.
 
Status (May 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
