NPL Site Narrative for Liberty Industrial
Finishing
 
LIBERTY INDUSTRIAL FINISHING
Farmingdale, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Liberty Industrial Finishing Site covers less than 0.1
acre in Liberty Industrial Park in Farmingdale, Nassau County, New York. The site is surrounded on three
sides by residential areas, the nearest within 1,000 feet. The site consists of three buildings, three acid
vats, a sludge-drying lagoon, two leaching basins, a number of finishing vats, and a basin for holding storm
water. From 1948 through 1972, the company carried out electroplating, anodizing, and painting operations
at the site.
 
In 1977, the State found that Liberty Industrial was violating its permit by discharging plating wastes
containing heavy metals to leaching basins. The leaching basins were contaminated with chromium and
cadmium, according to tests conducted by the county.
 
In September 1978, Liberty Industrial entered into a Consent Agreement with the State to clean up the site.
It did not do so. On September 21, 1984, Four J's Co. acquired title to the site from Liberty Industrial. The
State is now trying to bring the new owner into compliance with the Consent Agreement.
 
The site is underlain by sand and gravel to a depth of 95 feet, which allows contaminants on the surface to
seep into ground water. About 90,000 people draw drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : On April 12, 1985, the State and Four J's entered into a Consent Order requiring
the company to undertake a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
