NPL Site Narrative for Lightman Drum
Company
 
LIGHTMAN DRUM COMPANY
Winslow Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 1999) : The Lightman Drum Company site is located in Winslow Township,
Camden County, New Jersey, along Route 73. Lightman Drum acquired the property in April 1974 and
began recycling drums. Lightman Drum received drums, some full or partially full; which were emptied
before they could be forwarded to an off-site location for cleaning. Initially, Lightman dug a pit at the rear
of the property to discard the contents of any drum that arrived "heavy." This practice was discovered
by an adjacent property owner, who contacted the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP). A formal complaint was filed and Lightman was taken to court and ordered to line the pit or stop
the practice.
 
The NJDEP continued to monitor operations at the site and in 1977, during a site inspection, discovered
that Lightman had installed two 5,000-gallon underground storage tanks. Lightman applied for, and was
granted, a Temporary Operating Authority (TOA) permit to receive and store specific special waste types
prior to final disposition at an approved hazardous waste disposal facility. The facility was allowed to
accept chemical powders, pesticides, waste oils, emulsions, oil sludges, paint, pigment, ink residues,
ketones, alcohols, mixed solvents, acids and alkalis. The TOA was in effect for a period of one year,
pending the approval of an engineering design for the facility. Under the TOA, Lightman consolidated
chemical residues in the underground storage tanks, in drums, and in trailers. Numerous violations
occurred during this period of operation, which led to the subsequent denial of Lightman's application to
continue as a hazardous waste storage facility.
 
In an NJDEP 1987 sampling event and the resulting April 12, 1988 AO, the following contaminants were
indicated as being present in site soils; 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene, tetrachlorethene, 1,4-dichlorobenzene,
1,2-dichlorobenzene, 1,3-dichlorobenzene, bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate, butyl benzyl phthalate, di-n octyl
phthalate, aroclor-1254, chromium, cadmium and lead.
 
Lightman was ordered to conduct a Remedial Investigation (RI) to determine the impact of the pollution on
human health and the environment. Data collected during the investigation documented that a release of
hazardous substances from the site to ground water had occurred as a result of operations of the Lightman
Drum Company. Within four miles of the site, seven public supply wells and numerous private wells utilize
the Kirkwood-Cohansey Aquifer (the contaminated aquifer) as a source of drinking water. Over 20,000
people using the aquifer for drinking water are potentially affected by the site.
 
Status (October 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
