NPL Site Narrative for Lincoln Park
 
LINCOLN PARK
Canon City, Colorado
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : Ground water supplies in the Lincoln Park section of Canon
City, Colorado, have been affected by the waste disposal activities of a nearby uranium mill operated
by Cotter Corp. since 1958. Liquid waste containing both radionuclides and heavy metals from the mill
was discharged for years into unlined tailings ponds. Cotter is in the process of transferring this material
into lined impoundments. The company's monitoring data indicate a plume of contaminants, including
molybdenum, uranium, and selenium, extending from the mill along Sand Creek and affecting private wells
serving about 200 people in Lincoln Park. Sand Creek is an intermittent tributary of the Arkansas River.
 
Status (June 1984) : Cotter reports that it has completed transferring the tailings.
 
Cotter has taken several actions challenging the proposed listing on the NPL of Lincoln Park. In August
1983, Cotter filed suit in U.S. District Court seeking injunctive and declaratory relief to prevent listing in the
September proposal. The Court denied the preliminary injunction request. Cotter appealed the denial to
the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals. A hearing on EPA's motion to dismiss Cotter's request for permanent
injunction and declaratory relief from the U.S. District Court was held on March 6, 1984. EPA's motion was
granted in April 1984.
 
On Dec. 7, 1983, Cotter filed a formal petition in the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals to review
the September proposed listing of Lincoln Park. No dates for argument have been scheduled.
 
Cotter's Radioactive Materials License, issued by Colorado under delegation from the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, is subject to renewal in the summer of 1984.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
