NPL Site Narrative for Lindsay
Manufacturing Co.
 
LINDSAY MANUFACTURING CO.
Lindsay, Nebraska
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Lindsay Manufacturing Co. generates acid waste from a
galvanizing process at its plant in Lindsay, Platte County, Nebraska. The wastes were discharged into
a 0.1-acre unlined pond. On January 11, 1983, the company sampled monitoring wells near the pond.
Analyses indicated that ground water was contaminated with acid and metals. In October 1983, the
pond was closed. Prior to the closing, the plant received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) when the company filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Under a Stipulated Agreement issued by the State, the company has removed the source of contamination
and is purging the ground water. Five municipal wells serving Lindsay are within 1 mile of the site.
 
Status (January 1986) : Lindsay is pumping ground water and treating it by neutralization and precipitation.
The State is monitoring the ground water restoration program. Data from off-site monitoring wells suggest
that the program is controlling the migration of contaminants from the site.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : EPA is proposing to place this previously proposed RCRA site on the NPL
because the wastes generated by Lindsay are no longer subject to Subtitle C corrective action authorities.
On May 28, 1986, EPA published an amendment to its list of hazardous wastes which clarified that the
wastes generated by Lindsay would be considered hazardous only if they exhibited one or more of the
hazardous waste characteristics. Lindsay's waste did not display hazardous waste characteristics when
the surface impoundments were closed on November 2, 1987. Therefore, EPA intends to pursue cleanup
under Superfund.
 
In June 1987, a contractor to Lindsay detected volatile organic chemicals in on-site ground water.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has placed this site on the NPL.
 
Lindsay is installing monitoring wells both on-site and off-site to determine the extent of ground water
contamination as part of a remedial investigation/feasibility study.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
