NPL Site Narrative for Linemaster Switch
Corp.
 
LINEMASTER SWITCH CORP.
Woodstock, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Linemaster Switch Corp. has manufactured electrical and
pneumatic foot switches and produced wiring harnesses on Plaine Hill Road in Woodstock, Windham
County, Connecticut, since 1952. The 45-acre property is on a hill, with the factory building situated near
the top of the hill. The site boundary has been expanded to 92 acres due to contamination, extending
to Route 171 to the south, Plaine Hill Road to the west, and Route 169 to the north and east. The site
is surrounded by the Town of Woodstock, a rural community of 5,300 people in the northeast corner of
Connecticut.
 
Facility operations involve trichloroethylene (TCE), paint, and thinners; wastes are stored in barrels in
sheds near the factory building.
 
In 1986, EPA detected TCE in on-site soil, ground water, surface water, and sediment. TCE was detected
in Linemaster's main pump house well, which supplies drinking water to the factory and its offices. An
estimated 2,800 people obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Solvents were also detected on-site in artificial ponds used for boating. The site is unfenced, making it
possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with hazardous substances.
 
On April 8, 1986, the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection issued an Abatement Order
requiring Linemaster to develop a plan for a hydrological study that will be used to determine the extent
and degree of contamination on the site. The State is reviewing the company's workplan for the study.
 
Linemaster started to provide bottled water for its 180 employees in February 1986. With CERCLA
emergency funds, starting in June 1986, EPA provided bottled water for nearby residents that also have
contaminated wells.
 
In September 1987, EPA and Linemaster signed a Consent Order under which the company agreed to
install monitoring wells and sample them to determine the extent of contamination.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : Linemaster is now supplying drinking water to nearby residents and has
capped contaminated areas on its property. Additional activities Linemaster is conducting include pilot
plant testing of a system to remove volatile organic chemicals from soil by aeration and further sampling of
private wells, monitoring wells, soil, and surface water. The state is reviewing Linemaster's plan to install a
carbon treatment and water distribution system to serve nearby residents.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
