NPL Site Narrative for Little Valley
 
LITTLE VALLEY
Little Valley, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 1995) : The Little Valley site is located in a primarily rural and
agricultural area between the Village of Little Valley and the City of Salamanca, New York. Approximately
13 years ago the Cattaraugus County Health Department (CCHD) and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) identified trichloroethene (TCE) in nearby private wells. A plume of
TCE has been documented to extend approximately 6 miles toward the City of Salamanca.
 
Possible sources of ground water contamination include a former Envirotech drum storage area, a
private disposal site next to the former drum storage area, the 9th Street Landfill (an inactive municipal
landfill), and facilities operated by King Windows and Bush Industries. NYSDEC has installed a number of
monitoring wells in the area to investigate possible sources for the contamination.
 
NYSDEC and CCHD first discovered TCE in private wells among residences along Route 353 in 1982.
TCE was again detected in private drinking water wells between Little Valley and Salamanca at levels
above the New York State drinking water standards for public water supplies. Some of the highest
concentrations were found just south of the Village of Little Valley. Sampling results show a plume of TCE
that extends about 6 miles from the southern end of Little Valley to the northern edge of Salamanca, which
is part of the Allegheny Indian Reservation.
 
On September 1, 1995 the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry recommended separating
individuals from the release. CCHD, the New York State Department of Health, and EPA Region 2 believe
that the release poses a significant threat to public health. EPA Region 2 anticipates that it will be more
cost-effective to use remedial authority rather than removal authority to respond to the release.
 
Status (June 1996) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
