 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** March 2007 
LOCKHEED WEST SEATTLE Seattle, Washington 
 King County 
à Site Location: 
 The Lockheed West Seattle site is a former shipyard locat ed in Seattle, Washington, on the southwestern shoreline of Elliott Bay. 
 
´ Site History: 
The former shipyard operated from 1946 to 1986; it was sold to the Port of Seattle in 1992. The uplands portion of the old shipyard is approximately 25 acres and aquatic area is approximately 27 acres.  The uplands portion of the old shipyard, which was remediated under state authority, is now part of Terminal 5, one of the Port’s container shipping facilities. The aquatic area, which has not been remediated, is located on property owned in part by the Port and in part by the Washington Department of Natural Resources.   
The site had three dry docks, four pier s and a shipway. All of these structures have been removed except for the shipway, and two of the piers which no longer have decking.  
Past industrial practices at the shipyard  have resulted in contamination of the sediments. During the years of operation, paint, metal scrapings and sandblast grit from boat refurbishing activities were discharged directly to the adjacent surface water body (i.e., Elliot Bay).  
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The primary contaminants of concern include heavy metals (arsenic, chromium, copper, lead, silver, zinc) and butyltins. Polychlorinated biphenyls and polyaromatic hydrocarbons have also been found in the sediments. 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Elliott Bay is used for a variety of recreation purposes. Recreational fishing and small craft pleasure boating, including canoeing and kayaking, occur near the site. The site is also within the Usual and Accustomed Fishing Grounds of both the Muckleshoot and Suqamish Tribes. The tribes use this area as a commercial and subsistence fishery. It is a critical habitat for the Federally-listed threatened Chinook Salmon. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
The Washington State Department of Ecology (Ecology) had been the lead regulatory agency overseeing cleanup activities under Model Toxics Control Act (MTCA) authority  since the late 1980s. This site is listed on Ecology’s Hazardous sites list. In 1994, Ecology entered into a Consent Decree with the Port under MTCA which required the Port to conduct interim clean up actions on the upland portion of the s ite. These actions included the removal and treatment of contaminated zone soils, the clean up of storm drain sediments, installation of an asphalt cap and the design and implementation of a monitoring program. The Port implem ented these actions in 1995. In 1996, following a remedial investigation, Ecology drafted a MTCA Cleanup Action Plan for the aquatic portion of the site which was never finalized or implemented.  
 In January 2006, Ecology sent EPA a letter requesting that EPA take the lead for overseeing site cleanup. Since that time, EPA has had a number of meetings with the responsible party, Lockheed, to discuss the change in the agency lead, and to initiate and complete negotiations with Lockheed for the performance of a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study to fill data gaps left by the prior state investigation and to en able EPA to issue a Record of Decision for the site.  Presentl y, Lockheed is collecting additional sediment data to complete th e nature and extent analyses for the Remedial Investigation. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
