NPL Site Narrative for Lorentz Barrel &
Drum Co.
 
LORENTZ BARREL & DRUM CO.
San Jose, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Lorentz Barrel & Drum Co. recycles drums at a plant in San
Jose, Santa Clara County, California. The 5-acre site is surrounded by residential, industrial, and business
areas.
 
On-site monitoring wells are contaminated with trichloroethane, trichloroethylene, 1,1-dichloroethylene,
and tetrachloroethylene, according to analyses conducted by a consultant to Lorentz. Contamination is
believed to have resulted from overflowing sumps and spills. About 250,000 people obtain drinking water
from wells within 3 miles of the site. Lorentz is working with the California Regional Water Quality Control
Board (CRWQCB) to determine the extent of ground water contamination. The board issued a Cleanup
and Abatement Order to the company in August 1983.
 
The plant received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the company filed Part A of a permit application. On March 25, 1981, EPA removed the
facility as a treatment, storage, or disposal facility because it was not engaged in hazardous waste
activities.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
Status (February 1986) : In March 1985, EPA and the California Department of Health Services (CDHS)
discovered over 300 drums containing phenols, methylene chloride, and PCBs stored on the Lorentz
property. In response to action by the Santa Clara District Attorney, the company removed the drums.
 
CRWQCB is overseeing the Lorentz investigation to determine the extent of ground water contamination.
CDHS will oversee the investigation of soil contamination.
 
On February 7, 1986, the Santa Clara County District Attorney filed a complaint against the company for
violation of State hazardous waste laws. The facility has been shut down until procedures for compliance
are developed.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : EPA is proposing to place this previously proposed RCRA site on the final NPL.
The company is classified as a non-filer. Hence, it satisfies a component of EPA's NPL/RCRA policy.
 
In July 1987, the owner of the Lorentz site was ordered to shut it down permanently, sentenced to 2 years
in jail, and fined $2.04 million.
 
Recent sampling by CDHS consultants has shown extensive contamination in soil and ground water, both
on- and off-site. In addition to the chlorinated organics identified earlier, pesticides, metals, and PCBs are
present.
 
On December 1, 1987, EPA took over as lead agency for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS)
at the site. In February 1988, CDHS completed an expedited response action consisting of excavating
soil with high concentrations of PCBs. In March 1988, EPA and CDHS completed removal of 1,000 drums
of hazardous materials. All materials were transported to regulated disposal facilities. The site was then
graded and the surface sealed to control drainage.
 
In May 1988, EPA completed an engineering evaluation cost analysis for systems to pump and treat
shallow contaminated ground water.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has placed this site on the NPL.
 
EPA completed the RI/FS. Following a period of public comment, a Record of Decision was signed in
September 1988 finalizing the remedy as treatment of ground water with an ozone ultraviolet light oxidation
system. EPA is currently designing an off-site extraction system and an on-site treatment facility. EPA is
also investigating the extent of the contamination in soils and on structures and expects to complete an RI/
FS for the overall site in early 1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
