NPL Site Narrative for Louisiana Army
Ammunition Plant
 
LOUISIANA ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT
Doyline, Louisiana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Louisiana Army Ammunition Plant is located in Doyline near
Shreveport, Webster Parish, Louisiana. The primary mission involves loading, assembling, and packing
military ammunitions, and the manufacture of metal ammunition parts. The hazardous waste site consists
of 16 1-acre pits in which trinitrotoluene (TNT), RDX (an experimental explosive), and other explosive
waste materials settle out of treatment waters. The pits received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) when the Army filed Part A of a permit application.
 
According to tests conducted by the Army, soil, surface water, and ground water are contaminated with
TNT, dinitrotoluene (DNT), phenols, 4-DNT, tetryl, and cadmium. About 1,300 people depend on private
wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
The plant is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary survey) is underway.
 
Status (April 1987) : Phase II activities continue. In July 1986, the State issued a compliance order
against the plant based on deficiencies in its application for a RCRA permit. The Army has corrected the
deficiencies, but issuance of the permit has been delayed until a decision is reached on CERCLA/RCRA
jurisdiction over the pits.
 
Status (March 13, 1989) : On February 10, 1989, an Interagency Agreement issued under CERCLA
Section 120 became effective. Parties subject to the agreement include EPA, the Army, and the Louisiana
Department of Environmental Quality. Remedial actions covered by the agreement include the cleanup of
the hazardous waste site and contaminated ground water.
 
This site was reproposed on July 22, 1987 to be consistent with EPA's proposed policy for placing on the
NPL sites located on Federally owned or operated facilities subject to the corrective action authorities
of RCRA Subtitle C. EPA solicited comments on the Hazard Ranking System score for the site, which
includes areas subject to RCRA Subtitle C corrective action authorities. EPA has finalized the NPL/RCRA
policy for Federal facility sites and is placing this site on the NPL under the policy.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
