NPL Site Narrative for Lower Darby Creek
Area
 
LOWER DARBY CREEK AREA
Darby Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (May 11, 2000) : The Lower Darby Creek Area (LDCA) site as proposed consisted
of a release of hazardous substances from multiple sources into the waters of Darby Creek and other
nearby streams. The proposed site included six contiguous properties or groups of properties. From north
to south, these were the Clearview Landfill, the Industrial Drive Properties (a group of several individual
properties), the Sun Oil Darby Creek Tank Farm, the former Delaware County Sewage Treatment Plant,
the former Delaware County Incinerator, and the Folcroft Landfill and Annex. The proposed site was
located along an approximately two-mile stretch of Darby Creek, between Cobbs Creek to the north and
the tidal marsh of John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge (NWR) at Tinicum to the south.
 
The Clearview Landfill and the Folcroft Landfill and Annex were used for the disposal of municipal waste
between the late 1950s and early 1970s. The Industrial Drive properties were the location of a dump in
the 1950s and are currently occupied by salvage yards, vehicle repair shops, and other businesses. The
Sun Oil Darby Creek Tank Farm property is a crude oil tank storage facility, constructed in the late 1940s
and early 1950s over a rock quarry filled in with wastes from a local refinery. The former Delaware County
Sewage Treatment Plant operated between the late 1950s and early 1970s and included a sewage sludge
disposal area. The former Delaware County Incinerator operated from the mid 1960s until late 1970s, with
some of the ash residue generated by the incinerator being landfilled in surrounding areas.
 
Status (June 2001) : After considering the public comments received on the proposed listing of the LDCA
site, EPA decided to promulgate LDCA as a grouping of two separate sites, the Clearview Landfill site
and the Folcroft Landfill and Annex site. Each of these two sites qualifies independently for the NPL. The
two sites are grouped into one NPL listing for administrative purposes, as a single listing will facilitate
the management of the investigation and cleanup of the releases to Darby Creek. These releases have
affected or may affect the same portion of the creek, which includes fisheries, wetlands, and other sensitive
environments, including the John Heinz NWR. Darby Creek flows from north to south past the two landfills,
and discharges to the Delaware River a few miles downstream.
 
Hazardous substances of concern include heavy metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). The release of these substances into
Darby Creek poses a threat to people who might consume fish from the creek, as well as an ecological
threat to wetland areas and other sensitive environments. EPA has initiated the Remedial Investigation
which will include comprehensive environmental sampling.
 
The other four properties included in the proposed listing, containing five sources, are not included in the
final listing: the Industrial Drive Properties, the Sun Oil Darby Creek Tank Farm, the former Delaware
County Sewage Treatment Plant, and the former Delaware County Incinerator. EPA recently completed
an integrated Removal Assessment/Site Inspection of the Industrial Drive Properties, and will make a
determination of further action based on the sampling results. The owners of the other three properties
have all submitted Notices of Intent to Remediate to voluntarily address contamination on their properties
under the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection's Land Recycling (Act 2) Program.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
