NPL Site Narrative for Lower Ecorse Creek
Dump
 
LOWER ECORSE CREEK DUMP
Wyandotte, Michigan
 
 
The Lower Ecorse Creek Dump site is located in Wyandotte, Wayne County, Michigan. The site consists
of the residence at 470 North Drive and three neighboring parcels of land. The site occupies a level area
with the back of the lots abutting the Ecorse River. During the period between 1945 and 1955, and prior
to the house at 470 North Drive being built, the low lying swampy area of the creek was filled with material
from local industries. Some of the fill material contained what has been confirmed as ferric ferrocyanide,
commonly referred to as "Prussian Blue". The blue soil was also found across the street at 471 North
Drive, approximately two feet below the surface and the owner of the residence at 469 North Drive also
reported that he found the blue soil in his yard. In addition, there are two vacant lots east of 470 North
Drive where Prussian Blue is exposed. Neighborhood children have used portions of these lots as a go-
cart track and wearing of the topsoil by the go-carts has exposed the Prussian Blue.
 
The EPA was contacted by the Wayne County Health Department on October 25, 1989. EPA tasked its
Technical Assistance Team (TAT) on October 27, 1989, to conduct a site investigation and sampling.
Sampling results were provided to ATSDR for review and assessment. ATSDR's review on November 22,
1989, concluded that "The levels of cyanide found in the soil do present an urgent public health threat.
Steps to eliminate any direct contact with the contaminated soil need to be taken immediately."
 
Following ATSDR's determination that the presence of cyanide-contaminated wastes in an unrestricted
residential area presented an immediate and significant public health threat, EPA's Emergency Response
Branch initiated removal activities. On December 4, 1989, work commenced to cover the contaminated
areas with six inches of clean topsoil and fill in areas of the driveway and sidewalk which had been
previously excavated by the property owner. This action eliminated physical contact with Prussian Blue and
related cyanide compounds which had spread throughout the area. The initial action was completed in the
summer of 1990 with the establishment of a vegetative cover.
 
The Final ATSDR Health Advisory which was released on August 13, 1993, recommended the following
actions: 1) immediately dissociate the affected residents from cyanide contamination, which is at levels
of health concern in residential subsurface soils; 2) implement permanent measures to remediate the
contamination as appropriate; and 3) consider including the Lower Ecorse Creek Dump site on the EPA
National Priorities List or, using other statutory or regulatory authorities as appropriate, take other steps
to characterize the site and take necessary action. Such activities are better addressed under remedial
authorities than removal considering the costs and time involved in an extensive groundwater study and
potential groundwater remediation.
 
Additional recommendations by ATSDR include conducting a door-to-door well survey and well sampling to
determine the extent and level of any groundwater contamination. ATSDR also suggests restricting digging
into contaminated subsurface soil to prevent human contact with contaminated soils and released cyanide
gas.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
