OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** March 2008 
LUSHER STREET GROUND WATER Elkhart, Indiana CONTAMINATION Elkhart County 
àSite Location: The site is located within Elkhart, Indiana. Contaminated  ground water is moving primarily north, towards the St. Joseph River. ´Site History: The site consists of a ground water plume contaminated with 1,1,1-trichloroethane (1,1,1-TCA), trichloroethylene (TCE), 1,1-dichloroethylene (1,1-DCE) and some other chlorinated solvents.  In 1987 and again in 2006, EPA worked with the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) to provide the community with alternate water supplies (municipal water supply line extension or carbon filtration units for the drinking water wells).  This action addressed the potential impacts on the surrounding community but did not address the source of the contaminated ground water. IDEM and EPA are working to find a comprehensive solution to address the contaminated ground water plume. rSite Contamination/Contaminants: The contaminants of concern in the ground water plum e are 1,1,1-TCA, TCE, and 1,1-DCE.  1,1,1-TCA and TCE are typically used as degreasing agents, parts cleaner, foam plastic blowing agents, and engine cleaner.  1,1-DCE is typically used in making adhesives, synthetic fibers, refrigerants, food packaging and coating resin. vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: There are 34 contaminated drinking water wells in the area.  Ten drinking water wells exceeded EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level (MCL) for TCE and 1,1-DCE.  An additional 24 drinking water wells have low concentrations (below the drinking water MCL) of chlorinated solvents. 3Response Activities (to date): In 1987 and again in 2006, EPA and IDEM provided alternate water supplies (municipal water supply line extension or carbon filtration units for the drinking water wells) to residents and businesses in this area. }Need for NPL Listing: Applicable federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated to determine the best program to clean up this site.  The State of Indiana referred the site to EPA because a long-term comprehensive solution is needed to protect the private drinking water wells in the area. It was determined that the NPL program provides the best approach to investigate and address all of the source(s) and associated plumes to pr otect human health and the environment at this site.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
