 
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site***                                                                                                                                                  May  2013 
MACON NAVAL ORDNANCE PLANT  Macon, Georgia 
 Bibb County 
 
 Site Location: 
The former Macon Naval Ordnance Plant (MNOP) site is located at 600 Guy Paine Road, in an industrial area of Macon, Bibb County, Georgia. The MNOP is approximately 343 acres, which extends from Guy Paine Road to the north, Mead Road to the east, Rocky Creek to the south, and the Central of Georgia Railroad tracks to the west.  
 Site History: 
In 1941, the MNOP site was acquired by the Department of Defense (DOD), and was operated by the U.S. Navy for the manufacture of ordnance and explosives, including flares, small primers, detonators and other triggering mechanisms. In 1965, the DOD sold the site to Maxson Electronics Corporation (Maxson). Maxson also m anufactured ordnance at the site. MNOP had several buildings, explosive demolition and testing areas, fueling facilities, above and below ground storage tanks, solvent storage buildings, explosives storage areas, a metal plating facility, laboratories, a landfill area and a sewage treatment plant.   In 1973, the site was sold to Allied Chemical Corporation (Allied). Allied manufactured seatbelt components at the site until 1981, when they sold the site to a current owner, Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority. Since 1981 a number of parcels have been leased and/or sold to various entities. The site is currently known as the Macon- Bibb County Allied Industrial Park.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Former operations have resulted in widespread soil contamination with metals, including mercury and cadmium, PCBs and pesticides (DDT, DDE, alpha-chlordane and gamma-chlordane). Ground water contamination, with high levels of trichloroethylene (TCE) and its breakdown products, originates from the old wastewater treatment plant, migrates under the site and has been detected in the wetlands area of Rocky Creek. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Contaminated soil and ground water have contaminated Rocky Creek and the associated wetlands. There are no drinking water intakes on Rocky Creek, but Rocky Creek is designated as a fishery.  
 Response Activities (to date): 
No response actions have been taken to date.   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The EPA is proceeding with NPL listing because the US Army Corp of Engineers (USACE) has withdrawn plans to investigate and remediate the site and is not addressing the site under its Formerly Used Defense Site program due to the existence of other potentially responsible parties. No other state or federal authorities are available to address the site. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) T oxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
 
