NPL Site Narrative for Madison County
Mines
 
MADISON COUNTY MINES
Fredericktown, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 30, 2003) : The Madison County Mines site is located in the Old Lead Belt
area of southeastern Missouri in the vicinity of Fredericktown, Madison County, Missouri, approximately
80 miles south of St. Louis. The site is being proposed to the NPL because of the presence of metal
contamination, including lead, in residential soil and within nearby surface water bodies--the Little St.
Francis River and its tributaries. Lead was detected in residential yards at levels as high as 10,000
milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) or more than 70 times that of background levels. The primary sources of
metal contamination are large uncontained tailings and chat piles associated with local historical operations
that mined for lead, copper, cobalt, nickel, iron, zinc, silver, and pyrite. Some of these mining operations
date back to the 1840s.
 
Metal contaminants from tailings piles migrated through various routes to residential soil and nearby
surface water bodies. In 1977, a tailings pond dam broke and released accumulated tailings into tributaries
of the Little St. Francis River. In addition, several tailings piles have grown so large that they have spilled
over directly into the Little St. Francis River and its tributaries. For years, residents of Fredericktown have
used tailings from piles as fill for yards, gardens, roads, and driveways. This practice is likely responsible
for much of the residential soil contamination observed at the site. Other modes of contaminant deposition
in residential yards includes flooding of contaminated water bodies and emissions from nearby smelters.
 
A number of studies and investigations have been undertaken at the site since 1983. Collectively, these
have revealed metals contamination in local ground water, surface water and sediments associated with
Little St. Francis River and its tributaries, residential soil, and air. Groundwater samples collected from
onsite monitoring wells and piezometers revealed arsenic, copper, lead, and nickel concentrations above
EPA's Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCL) and greater than three times background concentrations.
Surface water sampling revealed concentrations of arsenic, cadmium, copper, chromium, lead, mercury,
nickel, and zinc above Ambient Water Quality Criteria (AWQC). Specifically, lead was detected in surface
water up to 12 micrograms per liter (µg/L) and sediment up to 11,000 mg/kg. Soil sampling in residential
yards revealed lead at concentrations as high as 10,000 mg/kg. Air sampling revealed filter concentrations
of arsenic, cobalt, copper, lead, and nickel at greater than three times background concentrations.
 
Metals contamination from the site has impacted the Little St. Francis River, which is an active fishery with
documented wetlands and habitats used by state endangered species. In addition, a number of residential
properties have also been impacted. EPA has conducted soil screening at 842 residential properties in
Fredericktown, Missouri, and identified 201 of these properties with soil lead concentrations above 1200
mg/kg.
 
Status (September 2003) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
