NPL Site Narrative for Madison County
Sanitary Landfill
 
MADISON COUNTY SANITARY LANDFILL
Madison, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Madison County Sanitary Landfill covers approximately
133 acres northeast of the City of Madison, Madison County, Florida. The city owned and operated the
landfill from 1971 through March 1980. According to city records, ITT Thompson Industries, Inc., disposed
of drums and waste containing trichloroethylene (TCE) and other compounds at the landfill during this
period. The county purchased the landfill from the city and has operated it since April 1980. The landfill is
permitted by the State to accept municipal solid waste.
 
In September 1984, the county found TCE in monitoring wells at the landfill. In November 1984, the
Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (DER) removed a number of drums from one location
where ITT Thompson's drums had been buried. Drums were removed from a second area in March 1985.
All materials were transported to a hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
Beginning in January 1985, the county sampled numerous private wells in the vicinity of the landfill. High
concentrations of TCE and 1,2-dichloroethylene were found in three wells. The county, and later ITT
Thompson, provided bottled water and ice to these families. In addition, the city, the county, and ITT
Thompson installed water filter systems at these homes.
 
In February 1986, DER entered into a Consent Agreement with the city, county, and ITT Thompson
requiring them to investigate ground water near the site. The consultant they hired found TCE, methylene
chloride, and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene in on-site monitoring wells and off-site private wells.
 
Approximately 95 private wells and 3 City of Madison wells are within 3 miles of the site, threatening the
drinking water supplies of an estimated 4,400 people.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
