OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the  HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notic es] For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800 -CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.***NPL Site*** May 2019  
MAGNA METALS  Cortlandt Manor, New York  
Westchester  County  
Site Location:
The site is located in the town of Cortlandt Manor, Westchester County, New York, in the lower Hudson River watershed. 
 Site History: 
Magna Metals conducted metal plating, polishing, and lacquering operations at the site from 1955 to 1979. During its operation, Magna discharged wastewater containing metal salts, cyanides, sulfates, an d trichloroethylene (TCE), an industrial solvent, into the ground through a series of interconnected settling tanks and leach pits. Wastewater showed high pH values and contained elevated levels of inorganic contaminants. Sampling investigations since 1982 have shown continuing hazardous substance contamination in the settling tanks and leach pits which have resulted in contaminant releases to soil, groundwater, soil gas, indoor air, sediment, and surface water. The former Magna building was demolished in 2013. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Sediment contaminated with copper and other metals extends more than 1.5 miles downstream of the leaching system. The groundwater and soil-gas contain TCE and cis-1,2-DCE. Soil vapor intrusion into the on- site building has been confirmed by elevated levels of TCE in indoor air samples. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Buildings on the property continue to be used for offices, a laboratory, and warehousing. The soil -gas plume extends beneath an active office/warehouse building. Some of the homes in the surrounding area, which is primarily residential, have contaminated soil in their yards and are in close proximity to the sediment contamination. Surface water bodies containing contaminated sediment include a wetland area, a small stream, a pond, approximately 1.5 miles of freshwater wetland frontage, and Oscawana Nature Preserve. Along the Hudson River, contamination threatens an eagle habitat and a downstream fishery used for recreation and consumption. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
The state of New York completed a Remedial Investigation in 2009 and issued a Record of Decision in 2011; subsequent sampling has led to the discovery of significant additional contamination. A sub -slab depressurization system was installed in 2012 to mitigate the exposure risks to on- site workers from soil vapor intrusion. The system is regularly inspected and maintained. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of New York referred the site to the EPA because of the risk to human health and the environment posed by metals and TCE contamination in soil, groundwater, indoor air, sediment, and surface water. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received  a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
