 
 
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Proposed Site*** March 2015 
MAIN STREET GROUND  Burnet, Texas  
WATER PLUME  Burnet County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Main Street Ground Water Plume site is located between County Road 340 and County Road 340 A in Burnet County, Texas, approximately one mile south of the city limits  of Burnet.   
 Site History: 
The Main Street Ground Water Plume consists of a tetrachloroethylene (PCE) -contaminated ground water plume originating from an unknown source that released into the Ellenburger -San Saba Aquifer. Site contamination was identified through monitoring of the Bertram Public Water Supply in 2010 by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).  
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
PCE is contaminating nine ground water wells, including two public supply wells and seven private water wells . Currently PCE contamination levels  in drinking water wells are below the EPA Clean Water Act’s maximum contaminant levels (MCLs). Two wells exceeding MCLs are used for irrigation and livestock watering.   
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The two contaminated public drinking water supply wells and the seven contaminated private drinking water wells serve more than 1100 residents. No filtration systems are in place on the contaminated wells.  The private drinking water wells in the contaminated aquifer are the only source of water for resid ents who live outside the city limits of Burnet.   
 Response Activities (to date):  
No response actions have taken place.   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Texas referred the site to the EPA because without identification and investigation of the source of ground water contamination and remediation of the contaminated ground water plume , additional public and private wells may be threatened. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but  are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the s tate.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry ( ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
 
