NPL Site Narrative for Mallory Capacitor
Co.
 
MALLORY CAPACITOR CO.
Waynesboro, Tennessee
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : Mallory Capacitor Co. formerly manufactured electrical
capacitors on an 8.5-acre site in a small residential community in Waynesboro, Wayne County,
Tennessee. The site is in the floodplain of the Green River.
 
This facility, a former shoe factory, was purchased by P.R. Mallory and Co., Inc., in 1968. In 1969, the
company, now known as Mallory Capacitor Co., began to manufacture capacitors using PCBs as a
dielectric fluid. In 1978, Mallory switched to dioctyl phthalate as a dielectric fluid. Dart Industries, Inc.,
acquired Mallory Capacitor Co. in early 1979 and sold it later in the year to Emhart Industries, Inc. As
part of the sales agreement with Emhart, certain PCB wastes, a buried tank, and contaminated soil were
removed from the site and sent to an EPA-regulated disposal facility. In 1980, Mallory changed its name to
Duracell International, Inc.
 
PCBs entered the environment through spills, leaks, and intentional discharges, according to investigations
conducted by EPA. On July 31, 1984, the plant voluntarily closed because of the discovery of PCB
contamination throughout the site.
 
In 1985, tests conducted by EPA, Mallory, and its contractors detected PCBs in on-site sand and off-site
wells downgradient of the site. An estimated 900 people obtain drinking water from wells and springs within
3 miles of the site. Sediments downstream from the site also contain PCBs, according to Mallory. Surface
water within 3 miles downstream of the site is used for fishing and swimming.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : On February 18, 1988, EPA and Duracell International, Inc., signed a Consent
Order under CERCLA Section 104, 106(a), and 122(d). Under the order, Duracell removed approximately
17,700 tons of PCB-contaminated soils and concrete debris, and 410 tons of contaminated equipment to
an EPA-regulated facility. The removal was completed in January 1989. In February 1989, the company
started a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the
site and identify alternatives for remedial action. Soil samples were collected at the site, and sediment
samples were collected from nearby Green River. Samples were collected from 33 new monitoring wells
installed on and off the site. Duracell plans to remove additional contaminated soil and collect a second
round of ground water samples.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
