NPL Site Narrative for Malta Rocket Fuel
Area
 
MALTA ROCKET FUEL AREA
Malta, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Malta Rocket Fuel Area is in Malta, Saratoga County, New
York. The site consists of about 445 acres. Approximately 145 acres are enclosed by chainlink fencing with
barbed wire; the other 300 acres are wooded and essentially have no industrial activity of the kind carried
on inside the fenced portion. An extensive residential subdivision, Luther Forest, is approximately 1 mile to
the southwest. The land north, east, and south is uninhabited for at least 1 mile.
 
From the 1940s through the mid-1960s, General Electric Co. (GE) operated a Rocket Test Station as a
contractor to the U.S. Government, which owned the site. GE tested ordnance and rocket engines, which
included experimentation with exotic rocket fuels. The site was operated under some level of security, and
many records have been destroyed, making it difficult to assemble an accurate record of past activities.
 
In the mid-1960s, the New York State Energy Resources and Development Authority (NYSERDA) bought
the entire site from the U.S. Government and began leasing portions of the fenced 145 acres to various
companies engaged in energy-related research. Wright-Malta Corp., a company started by former GE
employees, continued some ordnance testing and branched off into energy-related research as well (for
example, pyrolysis of solid waste and burning the resulting gases to generate electricity). In the fall of
1984, NYSERDA sold about 85 of the 145 acres inside the fence to Wright-Malta Corp. Currently, three
other companies operate in the fenced area in addition to Wright-Malta.
 
In June 1979, NYSERDA contacted the State Department of Health (DOH) and the State Department
of Environmental Conservation (DEC) for advice on how to dispose of rocket fuels left from GE's earlier
research. Because of the extremely hazardous nature of at least one of the fuels, unsymmetrical dimethyl
hydrazine, the regulatory agencies took a year to agree on the best disposal method. In July 1980, a
restricted burning permit was issued to NYSERDA and its disposal contractor. The fuels were then burned
under the direction of DEC.
 
Recent analyses conducted by DOH and DEC detected significant concentrations of carbon tetrachloride,
trichloroethylene, chloroform, and dibromochloromethane in the three drinking water wells at the Test
Station. One of the wells serves as a backup but is rarely used. DOH has advised the tenants not to drink
the water. About 1,900 people are served by wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Area soils are sandy, with ground water at approximately 20 feet below grade. The water supply for Luther
Forest comes from two shallow wells in the sand aquifer located approximately 6,000 feet to the southwest
and apparently downgradient of the Test Station.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : NYSERDA recently installed paired shallow and deep wells at seven locations
around the site. Analyses confirmed contamination in both shallow and deep wells. The Luther Forest wells
showed no contamination in September 1986.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
