 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the ti me the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including gener al information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs ca n be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2011 
MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP  Byram Township, New Jersey  
 Sussex  County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Mansfield Trail Dump site, which consists of several waste disposal trenches in a wooded area near the Mansfield Bike Path, is located in rural Sussex County in northwestern New Jersey.  The site is located near the intersection of the Mansfield Bike Path and Stanhope-Sparta Road.  
 Site History: 
Sampling by the Sussex County Department of Health in 2005 identified trichloroethene (TCE), an organic solvent used in industrial processes, in residential wells along Brookwood and Ross Roads in Byram Township .  In an effort to identify the source of the contamination in 2009, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (N JDEP) identified and investigated four areas of concern (Dump Areas A, B, C, and D) in a wooded area near the Mansfield Bike P ath.  NJDEP found evidence of TCE contamination in Dump Areas A and D, which consist of trenches in which sludge of unkn own origin has been deposited.    
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Sampling and analysis conducted by NJDEP in 2009 indicated the presence of TCE in Du mp Area A and Dump Area D above the New Jersey Default Impact to Groundwater Soil Screening Levels .  Other volatile organic compounds, such as cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2-DCE) and various chlorinated benzene compounds, have also been detected.     
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
TCE has migrated from the dump area  to residential drinking water wells, indoor air, and sub-slab soil gas on Brookwood and Ross Roads.  NJDEP collected indoor air and sub- slab soil gas samples from homes throughout the neighborhood.  The results varied with some homes showing TCE concentrations above s tate screening levels in just the sub-slab samples and some homes showing TCE concentrations above screening levels in both the sub -slab and indoor air samples.  EPA’s waste source and residential well sampling confirmed the presence of TCE in on- site sludge and the residential wells.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
Eighteen homes currently utilize carbon water filtration and treatment systems installed by NJDEP to remove contaminants from their drinking water.  In addition, based on the results of indoor air and sub- slab soil gas samples, NJDEP installed sub-slab depressurization systems in five of the homes.  
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of New Jersey referred this site to EPA.  Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state .  
