NPL Site Narrative for Marathon Battery
Corp.
 
MARATHON BATTERY CORP.
Cold Springs, New York
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Marathon Battery Corp. Site is in Cold Springs, New York. The
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers built a plant at Foundry Cove by the Hudson River in 1953 to make nickel-
cadmium batteries. In the 1960s, the plant was sold to a private firm and then resold to another firm that
manufactures airplane batteries. From 1953 to 1959, plant wastes containing cadmium were dumped at
the edge of a marshy area that leads into the Hudson River. As early as 1966, the State cited the plant for
its discharges and ordered it to clean up its emissions.
 
Analyses of discharge areas revealed concentrations of over 60,000 parts per million (ppm) cadmium,
with values of about 1,000 ppm in the surrounding land. In an attempt to correct the problem, the
company dredged the outfall site. As a result, the cadmium is now spread over the bottom of the cove at
concentrations of about 1,000 ppm. While the cadmium remains largely localized, the tides that sweep in
and out of the cove daily are slowly flushing the cadmium into the Hudson River. The dredged cadmium-
containing material has been placed in an underground vault on the Marathon Battery Plant Site.
 
Population served by ground water within 3 miles of the site includes the Gordon School, the Post Road
Mobile Home Park, and a number of residential wells. No other source of drinking water is available.
 
Status (July 1983) : The State and EPA are negotiating a Cooperative Agreement for a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
