NPL Site Narrative for Marion Pressure
Treating
 
MARION PRESSURE TREATING
Marion, Louisiana
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 22, 1999) : The Marion Pressure Treating site encompasses a
former wood treating facility that applied creosote to wood products as a preservative. The facility is
situated on a 10-acre tract of land in a rural area located along State Highway 551, approximately 0.5
mile north of the junction of State Highways 551 and 33 in the town of Marion, Union Parish, Louisiana.
The facility is bounded to the north, south, and east by forest land. Big Creek, a small surface water
body, lies approximately 500 feet east-southeast of the facility. Big Creek empties into Bayou de Loutre
approximately 7.5 miles south of the facility. An unnamed tributary, which empties into Big Creek, borders
the western property boundary.
 
The facility treated wood products, including poles, bridge pilings, fence posts, and other lumber, using
a creosote pressure impregnation process. The facility began operations in November 1964 and ceased
operations in October 1989 due to bankruptcy. Creosote contaminated process wastewater was generated
during the wood treatment process and was disposed on site from 1964 to 1983 in an unlined surface
impoundment.
 
EPA collected samples from material in tanks, ground water, soil, and sediment on the property and
surrounding area during investigations conducted from 1994 to March 1999. The Louisiana Department of
Environmental Quality (LDEQ) completed additional investigations at the site in April 1999. The EPA and
LDEQ investigations revealed the presence of volatile and semivolatile organic compounds, specifically
polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), in the former process area, tank product storage area,
monitoring wells, and drainage pathways located on the eastern and western sides of the processing area.
In addition, black, creosote-stained soil was noted in many locations throughout the site. In November
1996, EPA funded the removal and offsite disposal of four loads of creosote sludge from tanks at the
facility. As part of the removal action, EPA also funded the excavation of creosote-stained soil and debris
from the southern, northwestern, and eastern areas of the facility and the consolidation and capping of the
excavated material in the former process area.
 
Several clusters of small creosote piles have also been identified in the woods south of the facility,
adjacent to and upgradient of the wetlands and Big Creek. Erosion has occurred on the eastern and
western sides of the consolidation area, threatening to undermine the integrity of the cap and surrounding
fence. The liner covering the contaminated soil in the consolidation area is exposed at several locations,
and erosion could result in the further spread of contamination.
 
Sediment samples collected from the Big Creek indicate that the Big Creek and bordering wetlands have
been impacted by contamination from the facility. Bayou de Loutre, which receives water from the Big
Creek, is classified by LDEQ as a natural and scenic stream and is used for the recreational fishing of
catfish, panfish, white perch, and bass. A State wildlife management area is located 4 miles north of
Marion, and the Upper Ouachita Wildlife Refuge is located approximately 5 miles east of Marion, where
federally listed endangered species such as the red-cockaded woodpecker and the bald eagle are known
to live. Based on the limited investigation to date, the site does not appear to pose a threat to local
residents through the water supply, air migration, or direct contact with contaminated soil.
 
Status (February 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
