NPL Site Narrative for Marine Corps
Logistics Base
 
MARINE CORPS LOGISTICS BASE
Albany, Georgia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Marine Corps Logistics Base (MCLB) covers 3,200 acres
in Dougherty County, about 5 miles east of Albany, Georgia. The base is surrounded by agricultural,
residential, and commercial land. The Marine Corps constructed the facility in the early 1950s and has
operated it since that time.
 
The main function of the base is to coordinate distribution of supplies to other facilities on the East Coast.
The Central Repair Division rebuilds vehicles, radars, and other kinds of equipment; the Facilities and
Services Division repairs and maintains the MCLB property and equipment. These divisions generate a
major portion of the hazardous wastes on-site through electroplating, cleaning, stripping, and painting
operations.
 
From 1957 to 1977, a storm sewer received large volumes of metal plating solutions and stripping wastes.
This sewer drains to a ditch that empties into the Flint River 4 miles to the west. Since 1977, these wastes
have been piped to an on-site treatment plant or have been shipped off-site for disposal. Solvents,
thinners, paints, sludges, and solid wastes reportedly were discarded in four on-site unlined landfills.
Munitions, chlorine gas cylinders, acids, solvents, and soil sterilants were buried in an additional landfill in
the eastern section of the site.
 
MCLB is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. A 1983 IRP report indicates that trichloroethylene was detected in monitoring wells
near sludge drying beds. The 4,200 people living on the base obtain drinking water and 2,200 acres of
farmland are irrigated by wells within 3 miles of hazardous substances on the base.
 
In 1986, a Marine Corps contractor detected DDE, DDT, and PCB in sediments from the bottom of a
drainage ditch into which hazardous substances were discharged.
 
In April 1988, MCLB conducted a pump test to aid in the design of a system to recover and treat
contaminated ground water.
 
The Marine Corps cleaned up the sludge drying beds in accordance with a permit issued under Subtitle
C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). The contaminated materials from the drying
beds were removed and transported to a RCRA-regulated disposal facility. The beds were covered with a
12-inch concrete cap in October 1988.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : MCLB plans to begin recovering and treating contaminated ground water by
the end of 1989.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
