NPL Site Narrative for Martin-Marietta,
Sodyeco, Inc.
 
MARTIN-MARIETTA, SODYECO, INC.
Charlotte, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The Martin Marietta Sodyeco, Inc., Site covers 100 acres just
west of Charlotte, Mecklenburg County, North Carolina. The facility manufactures chemical dyes for the
textile industry. In October 1980, the company reported that organic solvents had infiltrated into ground
water at the site. In April 1981, the company reported that wells and streams near the site contained
various toxic organic chemicals, including chlorinated compounds, some in concentrations as high as 16
parts per million. Tests indicated that the chemicals came from an on-site landfill, which was later closed
and its contents moved to an approved site.
 
According to the April 1981 report, only the drinking water from the company well and two nearby
commercial sites, a tavern and a convenience food store, was significantly affected. Martin Marietta
purchased and closed the tavern and supplied a carbon filter system to the convenience store to reduce
organic compounds in the water.
 
Five additional residential wells and three commercial wells contained solvent levels ranging from just
detectable to 3 parts per billion. The company purchased and vacated three of the residences and
also purchased a gas station for use as a monitoring site. The company concluded that the remaining
residences and commercial sites were not significantly affected but is still maintaining carbon filter systems
at each location.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
