NPL Site Narrative for Marzone, Inc./
Chevron Chemical Co.
 
MARZONE, INC./CHEVRON CHEMICAL CO.
Tifton, Georgia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Marzone, Inc./Chevron Chemical Co. Site covers 3
acres at the junction of Golden Road and the Georgia Southern and Florida Railroad line in Tifton, Tift
County, Georgia. It has been the location of an agricultural chemical formulation plant since 1950, when
it was purchased by Chevron Chemical Co. At first, Chevron blended dry powders on-site. Sometime
during 1963-64, the company constructed a building to formulate liquids. A drum storage facility, three
10,000-gallon solvent tanks, one 12,000-gallon toxaphene tank, and a waste water pond were also
added during Chevron's ownership. Chevron sold the property in 1970, after which Tifton Chemical
Co. (1970-77), Tifchem Products, Inc. (1977-78), and Marzone, Inc. (1979-82) continued to formulate
agricultural chemicals on the site. Kova Fertilizer, Inc., purchased the property through foreclosure in 1983.
The facility is now owned by Milan, Inc. Ray Taylor Plant Co. operates a distribution center on the site.
 
Georgia Environmental Protection Division records indicate problems at the site since 1973. In March
1981, Marzone excavated the pond and filled it in. In March 1984, Kova Fertilizer removed 49 drums of
pesticide wastes. All wastes were sent to a hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
 
In May 1984, EPA and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division inspected the site. Analyses
conducted in September 1984 indicated that pesticides, including toxaphene, lindane, methyl parathion,
atrazine, and endrin, were present in on-site soil and ground water. In October 1984, using CERCLA
emergency funds, EPA removed and disposed of stored wastes, decontaminated buildings and equipment,
excavated contaminated surface soils, drained water and accumulated sediments in a truck-loading area
near the railroad tracks, and transported 1,700 tons of waste materials to a RCRA-regulated facility.
Prior to the removal action of October 1984, EPA sent notice letters to known potentially responsible
parties -- including Chevron, Tifton Chemical Co., Tifchem Products, Inc., and Kova Fertilizer, Inc. --
informing them of proposed cleanup actions under CERCLA. Chevron responded to the letter. Under
a Consent Agreement with EPA signed in April 1985, Chevron undertook cleanup actions, including
excavating the waste water lagoon, a drainage ditch, and a railroad ditch; filling them in; and transporting
the contaminated soil to a RCRA-regulated facility.
 
Within 3 miles of the site are 28 private wells tapping the shallow, contaminated aquifer. The wells are the
sole source of local drinking water.
 
This facility is being proposed for the NPL because it is classified as a non- or late-filer under RCRA.
Although the facility was treating, storing, or disposing of hazardous waste after November 19, 1980, it did
not file a Part A permit application by that date as required and has little or no history of compliance with
RCRA Subtitle C.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1990 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
