NPL Site Narrative for Mather Air Force
Base (AC&W Disposal Site)
 
MATHER AIR FORCE BASE (AC&W DISPOSAL SITE)
Sacramento, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Mather Air Force Base is located near Sacramento,
Sacramento County, California. Its mission as an air training command base is to train pilots and act as
support for the Strategic Air Command. This effort includes maintenance of aircraft and other machinery.
 
A records search of base operations has located a disposal site in the Aircraft Control and Warning
(AC&W) area of the base. This is the NPL site. It is now occupied by the Strategic Air Command Security
Police Headquarters. The Air Force has determined that spent trichloroethylene (TCE) was disposed of
in a pit on the site from about 1958 to 1966. A well near the site was used for drinking water until October
1979, when it was shut down due to TCE contamination. The well now provides water for fire protection.
 
Mather Air Force Base is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP). Under this program,
established in 1978, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. The Air Force has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary
survey) is underway.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Phase II of the IRP for Mather Air Force Base has been divided into stages. The
first stage investigated the cause and extent of contamination at three areas on the base, including the
AC&W Disposal Site, considered by the Air Force to have high priority. The second stage investigated 15
other areas on the base. The third stage, currently in progress, continues the ground water investigation of
Stage 1, with the drilling of additional monitoring wells and ground water sampling.
 
Status (July 14, 1989) : The Mather Air Force Base (AC&W Disposal Site) was placed on the final NPL
on July 22, 1987. EPA is now proposing to expand this final site to include the entire base, not just the
AC&W Disposal area. The original site had contaminated portions of the large aquifer near some base
production wells. Since then, EPA has determined that additional areas of the base are responsible for
further contamination of the aquifer, and may be responsible for contamination off-base. EPA is requesting
comment on the proposal. The site would be renamed "Mather Air Force Base."
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : EPA received no comment on the proposal. Hence, the site has been
expanded and renamed "Mather Air Force Base."
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
