NPL Site Narrative for Mathis Brothers
Landfill (South Marble Top Road)
 
MATHIS BROTHERS LANDFILL (SOUTH MARBLE TOP ROAD)
Kensington, Georgia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Mathis Brothers Landfill is located 1.5 miles north-
northwest of Kensington, along the east side of South Marble Top Road in the north central part of Walker
County, Georgia. The site is on a hill on a 20-acre parcel of land, of which only 5 acres were used for
waste disposal. The 20-acre parcel is surrounded by farmland and additional woodlands. The privately
owned landfill operated from 1974 to 1980. It had a permit from the Georgia Environmental Protection
Division to accept nonhazardous wastes. Sometime after 1980, the landfill was abandoned.
 
Residues from herbicide manufacturing and latex waste from the carpet-manufacturing industry were
buried in unlined trenches. According to records obtained from Velsicol Chemical Corp.'s plant in
Chattanooga, Tennessee, the wastes contained arsenic and organic chemicals, including benzonitrile and
herbicides. About 3,000 tons of hazardous waste were buried during the operational period.
 
The site is located in the outcrop of the Knox Group in the Valley and Ridge Geologic Province. The
soil is permeable, thus facilitating movement of contaminants into ground water, which is at 40 feet. The
Kensington Water and Sewer Authority provides drinking water to an estimated 4,300 people from wells
1.5 miles south of the site. A private well is 1,900 feet from the site.
 
Surface water within 3 miles downstream of the wastes is used for fishing and irrigation.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
