NPL Site Narrative for Matthews
Electroplating
 
MATTHEWS ELECTROPLATING
Roanoke County, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 23, 1981) : The Matthews Electroplating Site is 4 miles west of Salem,
in Roanoke County, Virginia. An electroplating plant operated at the 1.7-acre site from 1972 to 1977. The
plant's process wastes contaminated local ground water with chromium. There is no public water supply in
the area, and residents rely on private wells for drinking water. The property was purchased by the current
owner in 1977. Under an agreement with the State Water Control Board, the owner took several steps to
control the flow of rain water and storm run-off through the contaminated portion of the site. The ground
water remains contaminated, however, and there is evidence that the plume of contamination is spreading.
 
This is the top priority site in Virginia.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : In November 1981, $340,000, made available under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, was approved for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The work was
completed in January 1983. The cost-effective remedy has been tentatively selected, and a Superfund
State Contract for cleanup is in the final stage of negotiation.
 
Status (April 19, 1989) : This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the
Commonwealth of Virginia, has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under
CERCLA has been implemented, and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
