 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2006 
MATTEO & SONS, INC. Thorofare, New Jersey 
 Gloucester County   
 
à Site Location: 
 The Matteo & Sons, Inc. (Matteo) site is located mostly on the property of an active scrap metal recycling facility located at 1708 U.S. Highway 130 in Thorofare, Gloucester County, New Jersey.  The Matteo property currently cons ists of a metals recycling operation, a junkyard, and an inactive landfill. The southeastern portion of the property (approximately 5 acres) is largely pa ved with asphalt and contains several buildings that support the scrap me tal recycling business. The remainder of the property (approxim ately 75 acres) consists predominantly of heavily vegetated, undevelope d land that borders Woodbury Creek to the west, Hessian Run to  the north, and a residential trailer park to the south. Additiona lly, two utility lines (Colonial Oil and Public Service Electric &  Gas) are located on the northwestern portion of the property.
  
 
´ Site History: 
 The Matteo family acquired the property in  1947 and has operated an unregistered landfill and junkyard and a metals recycling facility at the site under various names (James Matteo & Sons, Inc.; Matteo Trucking Company; Thorofare Trucking and Trash Company; Matteo Iron and Metal) since at least 1961. In 1971, th e New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) approved Matteo's request to operate an incinerator to burn copper wire. From 1971 until 1985, Matteo recovered lead from batte ry terminals using a metal separation process called sweating. In conjunction with the lead melting operation, Matteo dumped crush ed battery casings in an area of wetlands adjacent to Hessian Run. There had been several reports of battery casing incineration a nd subsequent on-site ash disposal. Drums of unknown waste material had also been abandoned onsite. In January 1984, NJDEP issued an Administrative Consent Order to Matteo for solid waste violations and required Matteo to cease waste disposal at the site. T he scrap metal recycling facility remains active.
 
  
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 Sources of contamination onsite include an approximately 224,000-square-feet pile of crushed battery casings, an approximately 260,000-square-feet inactive landfill in the north central portion of  the site, and lead and PCB contaminated soil located thro ughout the property.  The crushed battery casings have  been deposited directly into the Hessian Run, as well as into wetlands along the He ssian Run, thereby altering the shoreline. Lead and PCBs have been found at levels significantly above New Jersey Residential Soil Cl eanup Criteria in the surface soils onsite and significantly above background in sediments. Lead is also a concern in surface water a nd ground water at the site.
  
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
 Lead and PCBs are present in onsite soils and in sedimen t samples collected from Hessian Run and Woodbury Creek. The contaminated portion of Woodbury Creek is known to be used as a fishery. The contamination also affects approximately 0.16 mile  of wetland frontage in Hessian Run and a bald eagle foraging habitat within Hessian Run and Woodbury Creek. The site is commonly trespassed and there is evidence of recreationa l use by the community.  Lead and crushed battery casings have been detected in and adjacent to the neighboring trailer park.  The site is accessible through the trailer park, and there is one residence onsite.
 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
 Matteo (under NJDEP oversight), NJDEP, and U.S. EPA all have conducted inves tigations at the site. NJDEP conducted Remedial Investigation (RI) field sampling at the site fro m September 2000 to October 2002. An Aquatic Biota Study was conducted in 2003.   U.S. EPA sampling in 2005 and 2006 have revealed cr ushed battery casings and lead contamination adjacent to and in the trailer park.  Under a May 2006 Administrative Order of Consent, Matteo constructed a high visibility fence and instituted engineering controls to prevent access to contaminated areas. 
   
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
