NPL Site Narrative for Mattiace
Petrochemical Co., Inc.
 
MATTIACE PETROCHEMICAL CO., INC.
Glen Cove, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Mattiace Petrochemical Co., Inc., Site covers 2.5 acres
on Garvies Point Road in Glen Cove on Long Island, Nassau County, New York. The site is a graded,
unpaved lot with a trailer, a shed, and a concrete platform with 20 aboveground and 20 buried tanks.
Mattiace received chemicals by tank truck and redistributed them to its customers. Operations stopped in
September 1987. M & M Drum Cleaning Co., owned by Mattiace Industries, also operated at the site until
sometime in 1982.
 
In October 1980, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) discovered
that drums containing volatile organic liquids were buried on-site and that waste water generated by
cleaning of drums was being discharged into subsurface leaching pools. NYSDEC found toluene, 1,1,1-
trichloroethane, ethylbenzene, and xylene in soil and shallow ground water, which provides drinking water.
Shallow water is hydraulically linked to deeper water, permitting contamination to reach the deeper water.
An estimated 44,000 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Immediately adjacent to the site are industrial areas, Garvies Point Preserve (designated by the State
as a significant natural habitat), and tidal wetlands. Surrounding these areas are schools and residential
areas. Glen Cove Creek is 500 feet south of the site. Surface water within 3 miles downstream is used for
recreational activities.
 
In April 1986, several creditors filed a petition to place Mattiace in involuntary bankruptcy. Mattiace
successfully moved to convert to voluntary bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy code.
However, the court later removed Mattiace from the protection of the bankruptcy laws.
 
In August 1986, a grand jury handed up a 21-count indictment against the company and three of its
officers. The charge included unlawful possession and disposal of hazardous wastes and falsification of
shipping manifests. In May 1988, two officers were fined and the third was sentenced to a year in jail, and
a jury returned felony charges against the company and its president.
 
During February-June 1988, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to secure the site, collect samples, and
remove 100,000 gallons of flammable liquids, 20,000 gallons of contaminated water, and 1,800 gallons of
liquids containing PCBs. All materials were transported to EPA-regulated disposal facilities.
 
The facility acquired Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the owner filed a Notification of Hazardous Waste Activity and Part A of a permit application
to treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste. Interim Status was terminated in November 1984 when
the facility did not file a Part B application. The site is being proposed for the NPL because it satisfies
a component of EPA's NPL/RCRA policy: the owner has demonstrated inability to finance appropriate
remedial action by invoking bankruptcy laws, as well as unwillingness to undertake corrective action.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is preparing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
