 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2006 
 
MAUNABO AREA 
GROUND WATER CONTAMINATIONMaunabo, Puerto Rico 
 
à Site Location: 
 The Maunabo Area Ground Water Contamination site consists of a ground water plume with no identified source(s) of contamination.  It is located in the muni cipality of Maunabo, Puerto Rico, in the southeastern area of the island. The size of the plume of contamination has not been determined as yet,  but EPA is currently conducting work to better define the nature and extent of the contamination. 
 
´ Site History: 
The Maunabo public water system cons ists of four ground water wells: Maunabo 1, Maunabo 2 (Bordaleza), Maunabo 3 (Calzada), and Maunabo 4 (San Pedro).  Maunabo 1 went into service in 2001, while the other wells were in service prior to that time.  Ground water samples collected by the system’s operator, the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA), indicate that chlorinated solven ts have been detected in Maunabo 1 since March 2002. At that time, the Puerto Rico Department of Health ordered PRASA to close the well because the concentration of one of the solvents exceeded the federal Safe Drinking Water Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL ). However, PRASA opted to treat the ground water with carbon filtration tanks at the wellhead rather than close the we ll in order to meet water supply needs.  Since then, the detections of solvents in raw ground water samples from  Maunabo 1 have exceeded the MCL on numerous occasions.   Samples taken after treatment, including tap water sample s collected along the distribution system down-line from Maunabo 1, indicate that the treatment has not been effective.  
  
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 The contaminants of concerns are industrial solvents, in cluding tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), and cis-1,2-dichloroethene (DCE). Of these, PCE has been det ected above federal MCLs in drinking water supplies.   
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Ground water and distribution water samples collected by EP A in October 2005 confirm the presence of PCE and cis- 1,2-DCE in Maunabo 1 and in post-treatment samples along the distribution line.  These most recent results also indicate the presence of a related compound, 1,1-DCE, in Maunabo 4, which may indicate the spreading of contamination. 
 The Maunabo Urbano water system serves a total popula tion of  approximately 14,000 people apportioned equally among the four public supply wells (i.e., 3,500 per well).  Therefor e, the contaminated wells in this system, Maunabo 1 and 4, serve almost 7,000 people. Wellhead Protection Areas are delineated for the public supply wells, so the plume lies within a designated Wellhead Protection Area. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
 EPA is investigating the contamination at the wells, includi ng efforts to locate the source(s) of the contamination. In November, 2005, EPA began sub-surface geological work to assist in this effort.  
  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
