NPL Site Narrative for McColl
 
MCCOLL
Fullerton, California
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The McColl Site is an inactive waste disposal facility covering
8 acres in Fullerton, Orange County, California. The site consists of two distinct areas: (1) the Ramparts,
which is in the eastern portion of the site and is surrounded by developed property and residences and
(2) the Los Coyotes Area, which is in the western portion and underlies a part of the Los Coyotes Country
Club Golf Course.
 
About 200,000 cubic yards of wastes, primarily oil refinery acid sludge and oil field drilling muds, are on-
site. The sludge was placed in sumps and covered with drilling muds and other fill materials. The major
portion of wastes is acidic and contains sulfur and hydrocarbons. The wastes have reacted to produce a
mixture of complex organic and sulfur-containing compounds, some of which are gases. The odors from
some of the gases are easily detected by nearby residents. There is a potential for direct contact with the
wastes and for contamination of surface water and ground water.
 
In October 1981, EPA, the State, and potentially responsible parties agreed on a three-phase cleanup
plan: Phase I, a complete site investigation; Phase II, a development and evaluation of remedial
alternatives; and Phase III, cleanup of the site. Phases I and II have been completed, and excavation of the
site has been determined to be the most cost-effective remedy.
 
Status (July 1983) : Phase III is scheduled to begin in October 1983. The State and EPA are entering into
negotiations with potentially responsible parties to compel them to pay for or participate in the remedial
action. If negotiations are not successful or timely, the State plans to apply for Federal funding and enter
into a Cooperative Agreement with EPA.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
