NPL Site Narrative for McGuire Air Force
Base #1
 
MCGUIRE AIR FORCE BASE #1
Wrightstown, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 1999) : The McGuire Air Force Base #1 site (MAFB) is an active facility that
occupies more than 3,500 acres in a rural area of Burlington County, New Jersey. The base is bordered
to the north by the community of Wrightstown, and to the east, south, and west by the U.S. Army's Fort
Dix military installation. MAFB is located within the boundaries of the Pinelands National Reserve. The
Pinelands are classified as Federal Land designated for the Protection of Natural Ecosystems. The primary
source for both community and private drinking water supplies in the vicinity of the site is ground water
obtained from the various aquifers comprising the Atlantic Coastal Plain. There are two major drainage
divides on site, and several streams to which surface runoff is directed. An extensive system of wetlands is
found along both major surface water drainage pathways.
 
MAFB originated in 1937 as an adjunct to the U.S. Army Training Center at Fort Dix and functioned
under control of the U.S. Army until 1948, when jurisdiction over the facility was transferred to the U.S.
Air Force. Past activities at MAFB in support of operational missions created a number of waste sources
of potential environmental concern. In 1982, the U.S. Air Force completed Phase I of the Installation
Restoration Program investigation "to identify, confirm/quantify, and remediate problems caused by past
management of hazardous wastes" at the base. Among the waste sources identified were 1) Zone 1
Landfills (comprised of Landfill Nos. 4, 5, and 6); 2) Landfill No. 2; 3) Landfill No. 3; and 4) the Defense
Reutilization and Marketing Office. The four waste sources comprise only a portion of the site eligible for
CERCLA investigation. Although only four waste sources are identified for listing on the National Priorities
List at this time, any CERCLA eligible areas of concern, identified or unidentified at this time, and releases
associated with those areas, comprise the site.
 
Phases of the IRP are currently ongoing at the MAFB, including Remedial Investigation and Site Inspection
environmental sampling. Hazardous substances detected by analysis of surface soil, subsurface soil,
waste, leachate, groundwater, and surface water/sediment samples collected include volatile organic
compounds, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and inorganic hazardous substances. A release to surface
water of nickel and mercury is documented. Sediment samples collected from wetlands immediately
downstream of Landfill No. 2 contained high concentrations of nickel and mercury. In addition, Cookstown
Pond, located near this area, is a known local fishing area.
 
Status (October 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
