OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May  2019  
MCLOUTH STEEL CORP  Trenton, Michigan  
Wayne  County  
Site Location:
Located in the city of Trenton, Michigan, the former McLouth Steel Corp property consists of approximately 273 acres of land including the former facility structures, process waste and debris associated with steel manufacturing. The former facility sits along the western bank of the Trenton Channel of the Detroit River and is bordered to the North by the Monguagon Creek. The site being proposed for NPL addition consists of the Southern portion of the former McLouth Steel facility which is now subject to an Administrative Settlement Agreement and Covenant Not to Sue. The EPA deferred the Northern portion of the McLouth Steel site to the state Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) program under which the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MD EQ) has entered into a Corrective Action Consent Order for a Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) -equivalent cleanup. 
 Site History: 
The McLouth Steel Corp facility operated between 1948 and 1996. In 1996, McLouth ceased operations and filed for bankruptcy. While in bankruptcy, McLouth sold the facility to Detroit Steel Company (DSC). In 1998, DSC attempted to resume steel production under RCRA interim status. DSC’s effort to restart the facility failed and steel p roduction equipment was subsequently removed from the production building. In 2000, DSC sold 70 acres of the northern portion of the facility and kept the southern portion. This portion of the facility is referred to as the Riverview Trenton Railroad site (RTRR) and is not included in the NPL site. Both the state of Michigan and the EPA have been involved with this site due to the extensive contamination. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The sediments of the Monguagon Creek and the Trenton Channel of the  Detroit River are contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), dioxins, furans, metals, and cyanide exceeding benchmark levels. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The Detroit River is a fishery and is used extensively for re creation. The Humbug Marsh, a federal wildlife refuge, is located downstream of the site. Surface runoff and contaminated groundwater discharges into the Monguagon Creek and the Detroit River. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
The EPA has conducted several removal actions: one in 2007 due to a fire at the site’s sedimentation basin and another in 2009 when hundreds of PCB containers in the southern portion were removed. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Michigan referred the site to the EPA because of t he extensive contamination left in place at the McLouth facility. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices]  For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800 -CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
