NPL Site Narrative for MGM Brakes
 
MGM BRAKES
Cloverdale, California
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The MGM Brakes Site covers 8 acres at the southern edge of
Cloverdale, California, and is surrounded by residential, industrial, commercial, and agricultural areas. It is
primarily a privately owned brake assembly and casting plant.
 
In the past, this facility operated casting machines that used hydraulic fluids containing PCBs. When plant
casting operations started, leakage from the machines collected and discharged onto an open field at
the south end of the plant. This method of waste handling continued until August 1981, when the State
directed the facility to discontinue the discharge and clean up the site. Hazardous concentrations of PCBs
were found in the open field and inside the casting plant. Run-off from the site drains into Icaria Creek, a
tributary of the Russian River. About 1 mile from the site, the river supplies drinking water to Marin and
Sonoma Counties. River water is also used for agricultural purposes. Groundwater in the vicinity is used for
domestic and agricultural purposes. The facility overlies a shallow aquifer 8 to 25 feet below the surface.
 
In August 1981, following a State order, MGM Brakes began removal of soil contaminated with oil from the
field adjacent to the casting building. Before disposing of the soil, the transporter tested it and found that it
contained PCBs. Following this discovery, the casting building was found to be contaminated with PCBs.
MGM Brakes cleaned up the plant building in early 1982. A study by MGM Brakes determined that PCBs
were in the soil to a depth of 20 feet. An estimated 3,000 cubic yards of soil are contaminated. Usable
ground water in the vicinity of the site is free of contamination.
 
Status (July 1983) : With these studies now complete, the State and MGM Brakes are nearing agreement
on the terms of a final cleanup plan at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
