NPL Site Narrative for Miami Drum
Services
 
MIAMI DRUM SERVICES
Miami, Florida
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : Miami Drum Services recycled drums for 15 years on a 1-acre
site in a predominantly industrial area of Miami, Florida. Dade County obtained a court order to close the
facility in 1981. While the company was in operation, as many as 5,000 drums of various chemical wastes
(including corrosives, solvents, phenols, and toxic metals) were observed on the site. Surface spills and
percolation of contaminated waste water have saturated the soil at the facility. The Biscayne Aquifer is
contaminated with various toxic organic solvents and heavy metals. The site is approximately 750 feet
from the Medley Well Field, which extracts drinking water from the Biscayne Aquifer during peak demand
periods.
 
In September 1981, EPA approved $500,000 in funds made available under the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act to study the Biscayne Aquifer, including the Miami Drum Services Site, which Dade
County had acquired for construction of its new mass transit system.
 
To emphasize the threat to the regional water supply, this site, the Northwest 58th Street Landfill, and the
Varsol Spill Site were collectively designated as the "Biscayne Aquifer Site" when they were first listed.
 
Status (July 1983) : The EPA-funded study recommended excavation and off-site disposal of
contaminated soil to meet the county's construction schedule. The county authorized use of transportation
funds, and by January 1982 had removed 8,500 cubic yards of contaminated soil and treated 0.5 million
gallons of ground water.
 
In September 1982, EPA awarded a Cooperative Agreement providing $1,434,565 to Florida to fund the
county's cleanup, to do a remedial investigation defining how the plume of contaminated ground water is
migrating from the site, and to do a feasibility study to identify alternatives for ground water cleanup. The
work is scheduled to be completed in the third quarter of 1983.
 
EPA recently completed a remedial investigation at this site as part of the area-wide "Biscayne Aquifer"
project. In January 1983, EPA approved $200,000 for a feasibility study of the aquifer. The work is
scheduled to be completed in the third quarter of 1983.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
