NPL Site Narrative for Miami County
Incinerator
 
MIAMI COUNTY INCINERATOR
Troy, Ohio
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : The Miami County incinerator and its associated landfill are
located in Miami County, Ohio, 2 miles north of Troy. The complex represented the first county-wide solid
waste management program in Ohio when it opened in 1968 on county-owned land. It was envisioned
to be an environmentally safe, cost-effective disposal method for residential, commercial, and industrial
wastes for 20 years. The incinerator was designed to burn 150 tons per day of combustible rubbish.
Nonburnables and incinerator residue were to be landfilled.
 
A combination of poor geologic location and environmentally unsound disposal practices resulted in
significant contamination to one of the most productive and valuable aquifers in Ohio. Solid wastes were
landfilled within 6 feet of the water table. Scrubber water from the incinerator stacks and quench water
from the ashes were discharged to an infiltration lagoon. Bulk liquid wastes (estimates vary from 104,000
to 150,000 drum equivalents) were allowed to percolate directly into the ground until this practice was
stopped in 1974. All landfilling operations stopped in 1978, and the site now serves as a transfer station for
wastes that are disposed of elsewhere.
 
Heavy metals, chlorinated hydrocarbons, and aromatic solvents contaminate the aquifer, according to tests
conducted by the State. The nearest residential wells are about 1,000 feet downgradient of polluted wells.
Municipal wells serving 19,000 people are within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (June 1984) : EPA is reviewing a draft work plan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action. EPA is also
conducting a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
