OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST  (NPL)  
***NPL Site*** March 2022 
  MICHNER  PLATING - MECHANIC  STREET Jackson, Michigan 
J ackson County 
Site Location:
The Michner Plating-M echanic Street site is located in Jackson, Jackson County, Michigan. The site is adjacent 
to the Grand River and consists of four buildings within four-acres in a mixed residential and commercial portion of the 
city of Jackson. 
 Site History: 
The site is a former metal plating facility which operated from 1938 until 2007. By the 1970s the facility was known to the state’s environmental authorities for its poor maintenance. The state issued numerous violation notices to the facility beginning in 1989 and nearly every year until it ceased operations in 2007. The site is currently owned by Jackson County which intends to redevelop the property for productive use after  cleanup. 
 
Site Contamination/Contaminants: The floor drains are contaminated with solvents and metals, including arsenic and hexavalent chromium, which discharge directly to the Grand River or to the soil and groundwater beneath the building. High concentrations of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) including vinyl chloride, have been found in soils near a public walkway. In addition, per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) have also been detected in groundwater beneath the site.  Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: There is evidence of buried tanks on site which pose a threat to the adjacent Grand River and groundwater. More than 65,000 people obtain drinking water from private groundwater wells within 4-mile radius of the site. Approximately 29,000 of those wells are within 1-2 miles of the site.  Response Activities (to date): As of 2016, EP
A’s removal program removed approximately 1,100 drums and hundreds of 55-gallon totes. Buried drums remain beneath the building slab.  Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Michig an referred the site to  the EPA because of the extensive co ntamin ation left in place at the Michner  
Plating facility. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but no other program has the appropriate 
authorities or resources to address the site at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing    this site 
on the N PL f rom the s tate of Michigan. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to  these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs  
can be found on 
the Internet at https:// www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
