   
   
    
            
  
 Essex County 
   
       
                 
       
         
            
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
MICROFAB, INC. (FORMER) Amesbury, Massachusetts ***NPL Site*** July 2017 
 
Site Location:
The Mircrofab, Inc. (Former) site is located at 104 Haverhill Street in Amesbury, MA. The approximately 14 acre site 
consists of the Microfab property and wetland areas to the south and southwest. 
 Site History: 
Microfab manufactured printed circuit boards, which included electroplating and related operations from May 1967 until October 1987. Prior to 1977, untreated wastewater was discharged directly to an on- site wetland adjacent to an unnamed stream. As a result, ground water, soil, and surface water are contaminated with elevated levels of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and metals. The property is currently vacant and has been unoccupied since Microfab, Inc. abandoned the site and filed for bankruptcy in September 1987. Site Contamination/Contaminants: The Microfab site is comprised of two areas. The first is an outfall pipe located on the southwestern side of the facility building which discharged untreated wastes from the manufacturing process directly into an un- named stream adjacent to the building. Contaminants include: VOCs trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethene and methylene chloride; and the metals copper, lead, chromium and cyanide. The second area includes approximately 12,450 square feet of contaminated soil near the former facility building which has contaminated the surface water. Contaminants in this area include VOCs trichloroethylene and tetrachloroethene; the semi volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(k)fluoranthene and bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate; and the metals arsenic, chromium and copper. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The site is located in a mixed  commercial, industrial and residential area. Ground water  ben eath the site is 
heavily contaminated with VOCs. Sensitive environments affected includes approximately 50 acres of wetland. 
 Response Activities (to date) : 
S
everal years after the Microfab Company filed for bankruptcy and abandoned the property, the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (MADEP) installed a ground water treatment system which operated from 1991 to 2012. This treatment system is no longer operational and the si te has remained vacant. Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Massachusetts referred the site to the EPA because local and state resources for cleaning up the site have 
been exhaus
ted. Other cleanup alternatives were evaluated, but are not viable at this time because there are no viable 
potentially responsible parties to conduct the clean-up. The EPA received letters in support of the proposal to add this 
site to 
the NPL from the Amesbury Mayor, Board of Selectmen, several other city departments as well as the gove rnor 
of Massachusetts. 
[The de
scription of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may 
change as
 addi
tional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subseque nt 
FR no
tices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure 
to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found 
on the Internet at 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp o r by telephone at 1-8 00-C DC-I NFO or 1-8 00-2 32 -4636. 
