NPL Site Narrative for Mid-America
Tanning Co.
 
MID-AMERICA TANNING CO.
Sergeant Bluff, Iowa
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Mid-America Tanning Co. Site covers 98.7 acres in
Woodbury County, Iowa, 5 miles south of Sergeant Bluff. The facility has processed hides under several
names since 1969. In 1979, Mid-American Tanning Co. discharged an estimated 900 cubic yards of
chromium-containing tannery sludge into an unlined trench on the property, according to the Iowa
Department of Environmental Quality. U.S. Tanning acquired the operation in 1985. Wastes are now
treated on-site. Solids are settled out in concrete-lined ponds, while liquids are chemically treated and then
discharged into an oxbow lake.
 
In July 1985, EPA detected elevated levels of chromium in the sediment and water of the oxbow lake.
Barium, iron, lead, magnesium, and manganese were also present. EPA installed five monitoring wells.
Analyses conducted in March 1986 detected arsenic, barium, chromium, lead, and manganese in the
wells. An estimated 1,200 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the
trench. A private well is 1,000 feet to the southeast.
 
The site is in the Missouri River floodplain. About 100 feet north of the unlined trench is a wetland used as
a nesting site by bald eagles, designated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as an endangered species.
The site is unfenced and the trench only partially covered, making it possible for people and animals to
come into direct contact with hazardous substances.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
