NPL Site Narrative for MIDCO II
 
MIDCO II
Gary, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Midwest Solvent Recovery Co., Inc. (MIDCO) II Site
occupies approximately 7 acres across the highway from the airport in Gary, Lake County, Indiana. The
area is primarily industrial. MIDCO II recycled solvents and disposed of industrial waste at the site using
the following methods: temporary storage of waste and reclaimable material in tanks and drums and
disposal of wastes via open dumping in trenches, sludge pits, and filter pits. The company operated until
August 17, 1977, when a fire burned most of the above-ground tanks and drums containing wastes.
Following the fire, the company abandoned the site without cleanup. Several thousand drums containing
burned residues were left on-site, along with several tanks. Soils, ground water, and possibly surface water
are contaminated, according to tests conducted by EPA. About 479,000 people live within 3 miles of the
site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Between January and March 1985, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to
remove 85,500 drums and drum remnants, which cleared the site of surface wastes. In July and August,
EPA excavated approximately 5,000 cubic yards of highly contaminated soil from a former sludge pit and
filter bed and piled the solidified soil on-site.
 
On June 19, 1985, EPA reached a settlement with a group of parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site to (1) reimburse the Government $3.1 million for past costs and (2) perform a
remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of subsurface and off-
site contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action. The Consent Decree became effective in
August 1985.
 
All of the piles of contaminated soil have not been removed from the site because of difficulty in obtaining
approval for disposal. Monitoring wells have been installed and sampling is underway for the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
