NPL Site Narrative for Middletown Road
Dump
 
MIDDLETOWN ROAD DUMP
Annapolis, Maryland
 
 
Conditions at proposal (December 30, 1982) : The Middletown Road Dump covers 2.3 acres off
Maryland Route 50 in a mixed residential/rural area near Annapolis, Anne Arundel County, Maryland. Over
several decades, the privately owned site was used without proper State permits for the disposal of rubble,
fill material, and miscellaneous wastes. The State found toluene, benzene, paint waste, and solvents in
at least 12 drums and one dumpster at the site. While taking remedial action, the owner crushed some
drums, spilling liquids onto the site. Although ground water at the site has not been sampled, potential
contamination is of concern because ground water is used as drinking water in the area. The site is located
within 1,200 feet of an unnamed tributary to Whitehall Creek, which empties into Chesapeake Bay.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : In April 1983, EPA determined that emergency conditions existed on-
site. Stream sediments and surface soils contained significant concentrations of heavy metals. Using
CERCLA emergency funds, EPA removed on-site contaminated materials to a hazardous waste facility
regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The remaining soil contained
background levels of contaminants. The site was capped with clean soil, and monitoring wells were
installed.
 
Status (April 18, 1988) : In January 1985, EPA started a remedial investigation (RI). EPA evaluated
existing data from on-site wells, off-site wells, and surface waters and also sampled and analyzed
sediments and air. All data indicated that contaminant levels were very close to naturally occurring
background levels, based on previously collected State data. The RI, completed in June 1985, determined
that there was no significant threat to public health or the environment via direct contact, inhalation, or
ingestion.
 
Under a Consent Order with the State, the owner removed uncontaminated tires remaining on-site to an
EPA-regulated facility.
 
The State will monitor the on-site wells at least annually as part of its inspection schedule for closed waste
sites.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because based on the RI, EPA, in consultation with the State of
Maryland, has determined that the site poses no significant threat to public health or the environment and,
therefore, remedial measures are not appropriate.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
