NPL Site Narrative for Middlesex Sampling
Plant (USDOE)
 
MIDDLESEX SAMPLING PLANT (USDOE)
Middlesex, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 29, 1998) : The Middlesex Sampling Plant (MSP) is located in the
Borough of Middlesex, New Jersey. The site consists of three sources known as the Middlesex Municipal
Landfill (MML) Pile, the Vicinity Property (VP) Pile, and Facility Soils. The MSP is situated within the
Raritan River drainage basin and runoff from the site flows south into a series of ditches, streams and
brooks.
 
The MSP was established in 1943 as part of the Manhattan Engineer District (MED) for sampling, storing
and shipping radioactive ores. Over the years that operations were conducted at the MSP, the buildings
and soils on the MSP and vicinity land parcels were contaminated with elevated levels of radioactive
hazardous substances. In 1967, all activities at the MSP were terminated. In 1980 it was determined that
the control of the contamination associated with the MSP would be managed under the U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) Formerly Utilized Sites Remedial Action Program (FUSRAP).
 
The MML Pile was filled with radioactive material excavated from the MML. The MML is a landfill owned
by the Town of Middlesex and was primarily used for the disposal of municipal wastes. Radioactive wastes
originating from the MSP were disposed of at the MML. The excavation of radioactive material from the
MML was completed in 1986. The VP pile was filled with radioactive soil and material excavated from
vicinity properties and a drainage ditch to the south of the MSP. The vicinity properties and the drainage
ditch were contaminated from MSP operations. The VP was filled by 1981. The Facility Soils consist of
soils situated on the MSP property that have become contaminated with radioactive hazardous substances
from the MSP operation. A significant portion of the MSP is covered by contaminated soils that extend to
depths of nearly five feet.
 
Beginning in 1980, investigation studies and environmental surveillance monitoring were conducted under
FUSRAP to delineate the nature, extent, fate, and transport of contaminants. Numerous environmental
samples have been collected from surface soil, soil boring, ground water, and surface water/sediment
sampling locations situated across the MSP. The analytical results of the radiochemical and chemical
testing completed at the MSP have indicated the presence of hazardous substances in soil, ground water,
and surface water/sediment media across the site at levels significantly above background. The presence
of radioactive hazardous substances in surface water samples collected downstream of the site document
the actual contamination of wetlands and a sensitive environment.
 
Status (January 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
