NPL Site Narrative for Middletown Air
Field
 
MIDDLETOWN AIR FIELD
Middletown, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Middletown Air Field covers 36 acres in Middletown,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania. The site is adjacent to the Susquehanna River, and the Swatara Creek is
located nearby. Until 1966, the Federal Government owned the site and operated it as Olmsted Air Force
Base. Various Air Force operations resulted in solvents and other wastes being disposed of on the site.
The current owner, the State of Pennsylvania, operates the site as Harrisburg International Airport. The site
includes the airport properties, the Mead Heights area, and several industrial properties.
 
Dichlorobenzene, trichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene are present in ground water at the site,
according to analyses conducted by the State and EPA. The State, EPA, and the Air Force are currently
studying the site. As part of its effort, the Air Force has completed a search of records for information on
past disposal activities at Olmsted Air Force Base. In 1984, the State removed all sludge and liquids in
Building 267, closed the fire training pits, and removed all materials from the location. That same year, the
Air Force removed some drums from the Mead Heights area. All these actions have been voluntary.
 
About 19,500 people obtain their drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In October 1985, EPA completed a search for parties identified as potentially
responsible for wastes associated with the site, and in January 1986 issued general notice letters informing
them of their potential liability.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
