OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site *** March 2008 
MIDESSA GROUND WATER PLUME Odessa, Texas Midland County 
àSite Location The Midessa Ground Water Plume is located in Midland County, west of the City of Midland city limits and east of Odessa city limits. The known ground water plume is generally centered along County Road 1290, between Interstate 20 to the south and U.S. Highway 80 to the north. ´Site History: Chlorinated solvents were first detected at two public supply wells at the Midessa Oilpatch RV Park during routine sampling by the Texas Commision on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).  In July and August 2006, TCEQ conducted a screening site inspection at the Midessa Ground Water Plum e site.  One public water supply with two wells belonging to the Midessa Oil Patch RV Park located on County Ro ad 1290, and 41 private drinking water wells were sampled within a quarter-mile radius of the approximate center of the plume.  rSite Contamination/Contaminants: The site consists of a ground water plume of a tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE) and cis 1,1-dichloroethene and 1-1-dichlorothane contaminated  ground water originating from unidentified source(s). Concentrations of PCE above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act maxium contaminant levels (MCLs) were found in the Midessa Oil Patch RV Park public supply wells and eight of  the residential wells sampled. In addition, concentrations of PCE were found above cancer screening concentrations in an additional five wells, and detectable concentrations were found in nine additional wells below health based concentrations.  Concentrations of PCE in wells range as high as 1200ppb TCE. vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: The public supply wells serve residents at the Midessa Oilpat ch RV Park.  Approximately 168 individuals have had their water supply contaminated including the residents of the RV  Park and private wells containing one or more of the chlorinated solvents. There is no muncipal city water supply available to this rural sector of Midland county.  TCEQ has not yet defined the outer boundary of the plume. 3Response Activities (to date): As of February 19, 2007, a filtration system was installed by TCEQ, on the public supply wells at the Midessa Oilpatch RV Park. To date, seven filtration systems have been installed by the TCEQ, accounting for all but one private well found  to exceed MCLs. One resident refused a filtration system.  Cu rrently the TCEQ is providing operation and maintenance for the filtration systems.  The current systems have been designed for a six month period.  }Need for NPL Listing: The State of Texas referred the site to EPA because of th e presence of TCE in a public water supply.  TCEQ and EPA evaluated other cleanup programs to protect drinking water supplies and no other viable options were available.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State of Texas. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
