NPL Site Narrative for Midnite Mine
 
MIDNITE MINE
Wellpinit, Washington
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 16, 1999) : The Midnite Mine is an inactive open-pit uranium mine on
the Spokane Indian Reservation. The mine, located about eight miles from Wellpinit, Washington, was
developed and operated by Dawn Mining Company (Dawn). Dawn is a subsidiary corporation 49 percent
owned by Midnite Mines, Inc., a publicly held Delaware corporation originally incorporated by Spokane
Tribal members and others. The remaining 51 percent of DMC is held by Newmont Gold, Inc. The property
is leased by Dawn from the Spokane Tribe and individual tribal members, and the leases are administered
by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA).
 
Mining operations began in 1955 and continued until 1981, excluding a four year period in the late
1960s. During mine operations, uranium ore was transported from Midnite Mine to Dawn's mill in Ford,
Washington, located 25 miles east of the mine, just outside the reservation boundary. Mining operations
produced approximately 2.9 million tons of ore averaging 0.2 percent uranium oxide. Left behind are some
2.4 million tons of stockpiled ore (containing approximately 2 million pounds of uranium oxide) and 33
million tons of waste rock. Of the six pits excavated, two are still open and are partially filled with water
from inflow, precipitation, and collected seeps. The other four pits have been back-filled with waste rock
from the mine.
 
Exposed surfaces of rock in ore piles, waste rock piles, and forming pit walls generate acid rock drainage
in groundwater, seeps, and surface water. Surface water from the mine's drainage basin flows to three
drainages which empty into Blue Creek. Blue Creek is a fishery and a spawning and nursery area for fish
and provides habitat for a fish species of special concern to the State of Washington. Blue Creek flows into
Lake Roosevelt about 3 miles from the mine and is also associated with palustrine wetlands.
 
Pursuant to a Bureau of Land Management order, in 1992 DMC started collecting water from discrete
seepage points, pumping it to one of the pits, and treating it in an on-site treatment system. Treated water
is discharged to surface water on site subject to NPDES permit limits. The resulting semi-solid filtercake is
transported by truck to the Dawn mill, where it is processed to extract marketable uranium and disposed of
in the mill's licensed tailings disposal area.
 
Samples taken by the U.S. Bureau of Mines and the U.S. Geological Survey indicate that seeps, ground
water and pit water at Midnite Mine are contaminated with heavy metals and radionuclides. Contamination
of Blue Creek with metals and radionuclides has been documented. In April 1998, EPA conducted an
Expanded Site Inspection (ESI). Elevated levels of metals and radionuclides were detected in numerous
on-site sources. Several ground water seeps containing elevated levels of metals and radionuclides were
observed to be flowing into nearby surface water drainages. Surface water and sediments of Blue Creek
were also found to contain elevated levels of metals and radionuclides. Samples from the wetland in the
East Drainage on site indicated chromium levels above the Ambient Water Quality Criteria.
 
Status (May 2000) : Since the proposed listing of Midnite Mine in February 1999, EPA has completed a
first phase of RI/FS field sampling which addresses potential off-site impacts and background conditions
for sediments, surface water, and ground water. The decision to initiate an EPA-funded study followed
unsuccessful negotiations with DMC for conduct of the RI/FS. EPA is now assessing data reported by the
PRP during 1999 and is scoping additional work needed to to support the human health and ecological risk
assessment and the evaluation of site remedial options.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
