NPL Site Narrative for Milan Army
Ammunition Plant
 
MILAN ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT
Milan, Tennessee
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Milan Army Ammunition Plant (AAP) in Milan, Gibson
County, Tennessee, produces munitions for the U.S. Army. The "O" Line at Milan, a conventional munition
demobilization facility, operated from 1942 until December 1978. The major function of the "O" Line was to
remove explosives (TNT and TNT-RDX mixtures) from munitions by injecting a high-pressure stream of hot
water and steam into the open cavity of the munitions. Effluent from the "O" Line operation was discharged
into 11 unlined settling ponds with an estimated capacity of 5.5 million gallons. Between 1971 and 1981,
sediments were routinely dredged from the ponds and stored on the ground. In 1981, the ponds were lined,
and the accumulated sediments placed into the ponds.
 
Analyses of samples collected in March 1979 from on-site water supply and monitoring wells indicated
the presence of explosives and heavy metals. Three water supply wells serving the City of Milan and
numerous private wells are located less than 3 miles from the area of known ground water contamination.
The direction of ground water flow has not been completely determined. AAP supply wells are located on-
site. More than 13,000 people within 3 miles of the site depend on ground water as a source of drinking
water.
 
Milan AAP is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search) and Phase II (preliminary survey). Phase IV
(remedial action) is being undertaken to close the "O" Line ponds.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is reviewing cleanup work completed to date to determine if it is comparable
to EPA's guidance for remedial investigations/feasibility studies and complies with the National
Contingency Plan, the Federal regulation by which CERCLA is implemented.
 
EPA is developing a permit under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). The
permit would cover cleanup of the CERCLA portions of Milan.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of RCRA. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore,
this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
