 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Su bstances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2011 
MILFORD CONTAMINATED  AQUIFER  Milford , Ohio  
 Clermont County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Milford Contaminated Aquifer site is a ground water plume contaminated with chlorinated solvents in the vicinity of Main Street and Lila Avenue in the City of Milford, Clermont County, Ohio.  
 Site History: 
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) were first detected in City of Milford public wells in 1986.  The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency began searching for the source of the VOC contamination in 1991.  Despite several investigations , the source of VOC contamination has not been identified.    
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Chlorinated solvents detected in ground water at the site include tetrachloroethene (PCE); trichloroethene (TCE); cis -1,2- dichloroethene (DCE); and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (TCA).  The plume is estimated to extend approximately 3, 000 feet from the well field to its probable origin east of the well field .   
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/E nvironment: 
The City of Milford’s public supply wells were found to have been contaminated by VOCs.  Samples collected from city well 3 before treatment contained PCE above its EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL), and TCE, cis-1,2-DCE, and 1,1,1-TCA above background levels.  Samples collected from city well s 1 and 2 before treatment contained PCE and 1,1,1-TCA above background levels, and a sample collected from city well 4 before treatment was found to have 1,1,1-TCA above background levels.  The City of Milford’s  well field serves 6,000 people.  
 Response Activities (to date): 
The City of Milford installed and maintains an air stripper to remove VOCs from its treated water.   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of Ohio referred the site to EPA because of the elevated VOCs found in the ground water that have contaminated the City of Milford’s public water supply wells.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.   
