 
   
   
  
   
     
   
   
  
   
  
 
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Proposed Site*** September 2009 
MILLSBORO TCE Millsboro, Delaware Sussex County 
Site Location: The Millsboro TCE site is an area of trichloroethene (TCE) c ontamination located at the intersection of Wharton Street and East Dupont Highway in the Town of Millsboro, which is located in southern Delaware. Site History: The source of the contamination is the former location of a poultry vaccine manufacturing building that was demolished in 1999.  TCE was used in the manufacturing process and was released to underground tanks and the onsite septic system.    Site Contamination/Contaminants: The primary contaminant is TCE.  Tank sludge samples from the poultry vaccine manufacturing plant contained elevated levels of TCE. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Two of the Town of Millsboro’s public wells are contam inated with TCE above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level.  The well water is being filtered to make it safe to drink.  Approximately 3,000 persons are supplied water by the Town of Millsboro.  Response Activities (to date): In October 2005, the Delaware Division of Public Health  (DPH) Office of Drinking Water (ODW) identified TCE contamination in the Town of Millsboro’s public supply wells.  As a result, DPH issued a public notice requiring the two contaminated wells be taken offline, and the affected residents use bottled water supplied by the municipality.  In November 2005, a treatment system was installed on the impacted wells, and the public notice was lifted.  In 2006, the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Envi ronmental Control removed approximately 209 tons of contaminated soil, tanks, and pipes from the poultry vaccine manufacturing property. Need for NPL Listing: The State of Delaware referred the site to EPA because it does not have the resources necessary to complete the remediation of the site and to continue maintenance of th e Town of Millsboro treatment system.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State.  The Town of Millsboro also supports listing. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
