NPL Site Narrative for Minker/Stout/
Romaine Creek
 
MINKER/STOUT/ROMAINE CREEK
Imperial, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The Minker/Stout/Romaine Creek site covers about 10 acres
near Imperial, Missouri. In 1971, the Bubbling Springs Ranch horse arena became contaminated with
dioxin when a St. Louis waste oil hauler sprayed oil on it for dust control. Afterward, several horses
became ill, and six or seven died. In 1972, the lessee of the arena excavated some of the dioxin-
contaminated soil. Later it was used as fill material in two residential areas, one occupied by the Minker
family and the other owned by the Stout family. Preliminary samples taken by EPA in May and June
confirmed the presence of dioxin-contaminated soil at all three areas. In October 1982, EPA analyzed 300
samples collected in the vicinity of the two fill areas. All data were subject to vigorous quality assurance
and reviewed by experts in EPA laboratories. These results confirmed the presence of dioxin in the fill
areas and in sediments along 6,000 feet of Romaine Creek. The highest level of dioxin detected in the area
is 301 parts per billion.
 
This site was originally listed under the name "Arena 2: Fills 1 & 2."
 
Status (July 1983) : In December 1982, EPA allocated about $750,000 for (1) initial remedial measures
involving erosion controls and relocation of residents near the two areas, (2) a remedial investigation to
determine the extent of contamination at the site, and (3) a feasibility study to identify alternatives for
remedial action. The State signed a State Superfund Contract with EPA in February 1983, outlining the
scope of work to be conducted at the site. It is scheduled to be completed in the first quarter of 1984.
 
In April 1983, the Centers for Disease Control issued a health advisory recommending permanent
relocation of 11 families on or near the site. EPA then allocated $2.2 million to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for the relocation.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
