NPL Site Narrative for Moffett Naval Air
Station
 
MOFFETT NAVAL AIR STATION
Sunnyvale, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : Moffett Naval Air Station covers 8,700 acres in Sunnyvale,
Santa Clara County, California. In the past, various solvents and sludges were disposed on-site into ponds
and landfills and onto the ground. As a result, soil and ground water on-site are contaminated. The major
contaminants in ground water are volatile organic compounds. About 272,000 people depend on wells
within 3 miles of the station as a source of drinking water.
 
Moffett Naval Air Station is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978.
Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. The Navy has completed Phase I (records search) of the program and is
beginning Phase II (remedial investigation).
 
Moffett Naval Air Station is in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. In October 1984, 19 non-Federal sites
in the area were proposed for the NPL. Facilities at these sites have used a variety of toxic chemicals,
primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water basin. Although these
sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the problem as well as take site-
specific action as necessary.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : In May 1985, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board adopted
Waste Discharge Requirements for Moffett Naval Air Station. The requirements outline specific tasks and
compliance dates Moffett must follow to define the full extent of contamination in soils and ground water.
 
In April 1986, the Navy released the final report for the verification step of Phase II. Moffett is revising the
quality assurance project plan and sample plan for the characterization step of Phase II.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, including this specific site, there are no areas subject to the
Subtitle C corrective action authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. Therefore, this
Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
