NPL Site Narrative for Monitor Devices,
Inc./Intercircuits, Inc.
 
MONITOR DEVICES, INC./INTERCIRCUITS, INC.
Wall Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : Monitor Devices, Inc. (also known as Intercircuits, Inc.) operated
a metal-plating business from 1977 to 1981 in an industrial park adjacent to the Monmouth County Airport,
Wall Township, New Jersey. The site, which was leased from the owner, covers about 2 acres. In 1981,
the company closed operations at this site and moved to a new location.
 
Process waste waters containing heavy metals, solvents, and corrosive acids were discharged behind the
building onto the ground via three pipes. State officials observed these discharges in March and April of
1980. A small unlined ponded area (25 feet by 15 feet and 6 to 8 inches deep) was noted at the rear of the
building.
 
Subsequent sampling by the State revealed significant contamination of on-site soil and ground water with
heavy metals and volatile organic chemicals. Two municipal wells serving 24,000 people are less than 2
miles from the site.
 
In June 1980, the State issued an Administrative Order relating to the company's discharge of waste water
onto the ground without a permit. The order required the company to pay a penalty, install monitoring wells,
sample the wells, and take remedial action as necessary. The company has not fully complied with the
order.
 
In March 1983, Monmouth County filed criminal charges against the company for violating State and
Federal environmental laws.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
