NPL Site Narrative for Monolithic
Memories
 
MONOLITHIC MEMORIES
Sunnyvale, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Monolithic Memories, Inc., manufactures integrated circuits
at a plant in Sunnyvale, Santa Clara County, California. The facility occupies about 20 acres and is
surrounded by residential, industrial, and business areas.
 
Monitoring wells on the site are contaminated with xylene, chloroform, and trichloroethylene, according
to analyses conducted by a consultant to the company. Contamination is believed to have resulted from
leaking underground storage tanks. About 300,000 people depend on wells within 3 miles of the site as a
source of drinking water.
 
Monolithic Memories has stopped using the underground tanks and is presently working with the
California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB) to characterize the extent of ground water
contamination.
 
The plant received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the company filed Part A of its permit application.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
Status (February 1986) : Under the direction of CRWQCB, the company has commenced a program of
pumping and treating ground water to contain the plume while the remedial investigation is underway.
CRWQCB, in conjunction with EPA and the California Department of Health Services, is overseeing the
various response actions.
 
This site remains in proposed status until EPA implements the appropriate elements of its final policy for
placing RCRA-related sites on the NPL and then applies the policy to this site.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Subsequent investigation revealed that this site is not subject to the Subtitle C
permitting requirements of RCRA. Its score on the Hazard Ranking System, which EPA uses to evaluate
sites for the NPL, is above the cutoff point of 28.50, and EPA received no information that prevents placing
the site on the NPL. Therefore, it is being placed on the NPL.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
