NPL Site Narrative for Montclair/West
Orange Radium Site
 
MONTCLAIR/WEST ORANGE RADIUM SITE
Montclair, West Orange, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Montclair/West Orange Radium Site is in two residential
neighborhoods in Montclair and West Orange in Essex County, New Jersey. Radioactive material, believed
to be radium-processing waste, was used as fill, resulting in unacceptable levels of radon gas and its
decay products in a number of private residences. Approximately 50,000 cubic yards of contaminated
material are scattered throughout a neighborhood covering about 1.0 square mile.
 
Several years ago, the State started to investigate a radium-processing facility in Orange that had ceased
operation in the 1920s. The possibility of off-site disposal of processing waste prompted an aerial survey
of surrounding areas for gamma radiation. In July 1983, the survey identified a number of homes with high
levels of radon gas. About 80 people are immediately affected.
 
In December 1983, EPA started a major field investigation to define the perimeter of contamination and
identify additional problem homes. Using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA installed ventilation systems in
affected homes as a temporary corrective measure.
 
Status (February 14, 1985) : This site, along with the Glen Ridge Radium Site, is being added to the NPL
because it involves a serious problem that requires taking immediate remedial action.
 
In September 1985, EPA completed a remedial investigation/feasibility study. About 160 homes were
identified as being affected in the site area. The results were announced at a public meeting in November
1985. EPA is scheduled to make its final decision on the remedy selected in April 1986.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
