NPL Site Narrative for Morris Arsenic
Dump
 
MORRIS ARSENIC DUMP
Morris, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 8, 1983) : Morris Arsenic Dump is an old gravel pit covering 5 acres
in a rural area about 1 mile northeast of Morris in Stevens County, Minnesota. In the early 1940s, about
1,500 pounds of arsenic-laced grasshopper bait were on the site. The subsequent construction of a
highway in the area may have dispersed the bait and made it difficult to discover the exact burial location.
 
Tests by EPA have detected arsenic in the shallow ground water. The City of Morris and private wells in
the area draw on shallow ground water. No drinking water wells have been affected to date.
 
Status (September 21, 1984) : As part of a remedial investigation (RI), EPA has installed 11 monitoring
wells around the site and sampled soil in the site area.
 
Status (March 7, 1986) : The RI indicated that arsenic levels in the surface soils were all below 7
micrograms per kilogram, well within the natural background range of 3 to 14 micrograms per kilogram.
Arsenic concentrations in the soils at the water table were somewhat elevated, ranging between 20 and
40 micrograms per kilogram, but far below the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) action level of 100
micrograms per kilogram for surficial soils. CDC was consulted with respect to the soils and concurred
that no action was necessary. Samples from the monitoring wells and nearby domestic sources indicated
that arsenic levels were at or near 3 micrograms per liter, considerably below the Primary Drinking Water
Standard of 50 micrograms per liter. The municipal well field for Morris is approximately 1 mile in the
opposite direction of ground water flow and would not be impacted by any contamination at the site. Other
domestic wells sampled in the vicinity did not have arsenic contamination above background.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the State of Minnesota, has
determined that the site poses no significant threat to public health or the environment and, therefore,
remedial measures are not appropriate. EPA has recommended to State, county, and local officials that, as
a further precaution, a notice be placed on the property. The deed notice would be entered in county land
records and state that the site had previously been used for disposal of a hazardous substance.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
