NPL Site Narrative for Moses Lake
Wellfield Contamination
 
MOSES LAKE WELLFIELD CONTAMINATION
Moses Lake, Washington
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 29, 1991) : The City of Moses Lake is in Grant County in central
Washington. On February 16, 1988, the Washington State Department of Health (WDOH) sampled eight
Moses Lake municipal wells as part of a routine sampling effort. The samples were analyzed for volatile
organic compounds (VOCs). Two of the wells contained trichloroethene (TCE) above EPA's Maximum
Contaminant Level established under the Safe Drinking Water Act. On April 4, 1988, and May 23, 1988,
WDOH resampled the municipal wells and confirmed the presence of TCE at high concentrations (up to
9.1 µg/L). In mid-December, the Washington Department of Ecology (WDOE), in an independent study in
the Moses Lake area, detected levels up to 12 µg/L in some of the municipal wells. The two contaminated
wells are part of a blended system that provides drinking water to 5,000 people. Other area residents
depend on private wells.
 
WDOH and WDOE sampling only roughly defined the areal and vertical extent of TCE contamination.
Based on these preliminary results, EPA conducted a study to identify the potential source or sources of
TCE ground water contamination in the Moses Lake area. During a review of nearby Larson Air Force
Base (LAFB) maps, discussions with former LAFB employees, and meetings with City and Port of Moses
Lake personnel, EPA identified a number of potential sources, including but not limited to, a variety of
former LAFB operations and disposal facilities, the City of Moses Lake municipal waste treatment plant,
an infiltration area for the LAFB storm sewer system, and a burn pit currently used by the Big Bend
Community College Fire Training School.
 
To identify potential sources, EPA performed the following activities: (1) inventoried many businesses near
LAFB and surveyed solvent usage; (2) collected and reviewed historical data regarding the two primary
operators at LAFB, the Boeing Corp. and the Army Corps of Engineers (COE); (3) analyzed historical
aerial photographs through the EPA Environmental Monitoring Systems Laboratory; (4) collected 92 soil
gas samples from the shallow subsurface along a series of transects crossing the study area (including
the potential sources previously identified); (5) collected 62 ground water samples from a number of wells
throughout the study area and analyzed for VOCs, selected ions, and other water quality parameters; and
(6) collected geophysical data of the subsurface in the area of one municipal well.
 
EPA's study of potential sources indicates that the area has a long history of operations that could have
generated waste TCE solvents, but no specific source area was identified by the techniques employed.
The complexity of the local hydrogeology greatly complicated attempts to correlate the available ground
water sampling data to specific portions of the several aquifers underlying the site. In addition, the
information generated during the soil gas and geophysical studies was limited because ground water in the
Moses Lake area is so deep -- several hundred feet in some cases.
 
Status (October 1992) : Various government agencies are taking an active role in addressing problems
related to the contaminated ground water at the site, including: (1) EPA is gathering information to support
the search for potentially responsible parties (PRPs) and is coordinating community relations activities, (2)
COE is conducting an investigation near the former LAFB to identify possible sources of contamination, (3)
the City of Moses Lake is managing the water system and modifying municipal wells to provide residents
with drinking water that meets Federal standards, and (4) WDOH is pursuing enforcement actions against
a private water supplier whose wells showed TCE levels above the Federal standard during recent
sampling.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
