NPL Site Narrative for Mosley Road
Sanitary Landfill
 
MOSLEY ROAD SANITARY LANDFILL
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Mosley Road Sanitary Landfill covers 70 acres on Mosley
Road in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma County, Oklahoma. Oklahoma City Disposal, Inc., a subsidiary of SCA
Services, Inc., started operating the landfill on March 10, 1975. Waste Management, Inc., acquired the site
when it acquired SCA Services in October 1984. A previous owner had operated the site as A-1 Sanitation
Co.
 
Between February 20 and August 24, 1976, the landfill accepted approximately 2 million gallons of
hazardous substances under a Temporary Emergency Waiver for Hazardous Waste Disposal issued by
the Oklahoma State Department of Health. According to the Oklahoma Water Resource Board permit
application, pesticides, industrial solvents, sludges, waste chemicals, and emulsions were deposited into
two unlined pits that have since been covered by up to 20 feet of solid refuse and fill.
 
Two interconnected aquifers are present beneath the site. The upper one is associated with alluvial
deposits of the North Canadian River and the lower one is associated with the Garber-Wellington
Formation. The combined aquifers range from 300 to 900 feet thick.
 
Ground water at the site is shallow (10 to 20 feet) and soils moderately permeable, conditions that facilitate
movement of contaminants into ground water. An estimated 57,000 people, including residents of Spencer
and Midwest City, obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : Under a CERCLA Administrative Order on Consent with EPA, signed on
July 28, 1989, Waste Management of Oklahoma, Inc., and Mobile Waste Controls, Inc., current owner
of the property, will conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. EPA is to be reimbursed for oversight
costs. Field work was scheduled to start in January 1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
