NPL Site Narrative for Motorola, Inc. (52nd
Street Plant)
 
MOTOROLA, INC. (52ND STREET PLANT)
Phoenix, Arizona
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Motorola, Inc., manufactures semiconductors and related
components at a plant on 52nd Street in Phoenix, Maricopa County, Arizona. The facility is situated
approximately 1.5 miles northeast of the Sky Harbor International Airport and is surrounded by residential,
industrial, business, agricultural, and recreational areas.
 
Ground water beneath the 52nd Street Plant is contaminated with trichloroethylene (TCE), trichloroethane
(TCA), and other organic and inorganic compounds, according to analyses conducted by EPA and
Motorola. Contamination may have resulted from leaking storage tanks, leaking effluent lines, and past
disposal practices, including the use of dry wells. Motorola detected TCE and TCA in its monitoring wells at
least 1 mile from the facility. Several private wells not used for drinking and one irrigation well contain TCE
above the State action level of 5 parts per billion.
 
Prior to October 1983, Motorola installed 22 on-site and 6 off-site monitoring wells, as described in a Phase
I remedial investigation report. In October 1983, the Arizona Department of Health Services established
a Task Force comprised of the State, EPA, and local agencies. The Task Force has guided Motorola in
developing a detailed workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
The plant received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the company filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Status (January 1986) : Motorola has completed most field activities for Phase II of the RI/FS. The report
is expected in 1986. Off-site sampling has confirmed a plume of contaminated ground water extending at
least 1 mile west of the plant. In 1986, additional monitoring wells will be installed, ground water and soil
will be tested, and a pilot plant for pumping and treating contaminated ground water will be installed.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : EPA is proposing to place this previously proposed RCRA site on the final NPL.
On May 19, 1986, Motorola requested that the facility be converted to a hazardous waste generator. On
July 29, 1986, EPA confirmed that the plant was operating as a generator. Hence, it satisfies a component
of EPA's NPL/RCRA policy.
 
In May 1986, the State certified that a container storage area on-site had been cleaned up in accordance
with Subtitle C.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has placed this site on the NPL.
 
Following public comment on Motorola's RI/FS, a Record of Decision was signed in September 1988
finalizing the remedy for the first phase of the response. Work is scheduled to begin in late 1990. Motorola
and the State signed a Consent Decree in June 1989 and stipulated penalties for the remedial design and
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
