NPL Site Narrative for Mountain Pine
Pressure Treating
 
MOUNTAIN PINE PRESSURE TREATING
Plainview, Arkansas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 23, 1999) : The Mountain Pine Pressure Treating site (also known as
the Plainview Lumber site) consists of three related contiguous facilities situated on 95 acres. The three
facilities are Mountain Pine Pressure Treating, Inc., Plainview Lumber Company, and CCA Treatment
Plant (CCATP). Mountain Pine Pressure Treating is a subsidiary of Plainview Lumber Company and
treated timber with pentachlorophenol (PCP) and chromate copper arsenate (CCA) from 1965 to 1981. The
CCATP facility was operated by the Plainview Lumber Company from 1980 to 1986 and for a brief period
in the summer of 1989.
 
The Mountain Pine Pressure Treating waste management system consisted of PCP and CCA drip tracks, a
recovery holding pond (RHP), PCP and CCA treatment cylinders, a spray evaporation pond (SEP), and an
oil separator. During operations, the treated lumber was placed on the drip tracks and the excess solution
was allowed to drain onto the tracks. The area between the drip tracks and the RHP is sloped toward
the RHP. The oil separator, located between the drip tracks and the RHP, separated PCP oil from the
excess solution. The liquid remaining after PCP oil was removed was discharged into the RHP. When the
RHP was full, the excess water was pumped to the SEP via an above ground pipeline. In 1987, the dike
surrounding the RHP was breached allowing wastewater and sludge containing PCP and CCA to enter the
adjacent drainage ditch, Porter Creek, and wetlands along the creek.
 
A Site Inspection was conducted by the EPA Region 6 Field Investigation Team (FIT) in June 1988. FIT
collected soil, sediment, surface water, ground water, asbestos, and air samples. Chemical analysis of
the samples revealed the presence of wood treating chemicals (PCP, chromium, copper, and arsenic) in
several locations on site and off site in Porter Creek and adjacent wetlands.
 
An Expanded Site Inspection was conducted by FIT in May 1991. On-site source samples were collected
from the RHP, SEP, two drainage ditches, lumber storage area, and CCATP. Elevated concentrations of
wood treating chemicals (PCP, chromium, copper, arsenic) were detected in soil, sediment, and water
samples collected from the RHP, SEP, two drainage ditches, lumber storage area, CCATP, Porter Creek,
and adjacent wetlands.
 
Porter Creek is a major tributary of Lake Nimrod and contains a designated wetland. Lake Nimrod contains
an intake that supplies drinking water for the City of Plainview, and is used for flood control, fishing,
hunting, boating, and camping.
 
Status (July 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
