NPL Site Narrative for Mound Plant
(USDOE)
 
MOUND PLANT (USDOE)
Miamisburg, Ohio
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Mound Plant encompasses 306 acres within the southern
city limits of Miamisburg, Montgomery County, Ohio. Mound is bounded by an urbanized area to the north
and east, rural/farmland to the south, and a railroad right-of-way to the west. Mound has operated since
1948 in support of U.S. weapons and energy programs, with an emphasis on small explosive components
and nuclear technology. First operated by the Atomic Energy Commission, it is operated now by the U.S.
Department of Energy (USDOE). The facility employs 2,200 people, most of whom reside in the nearby
Miamisburg and Dayton areas.
 
Mound consists of two elevated areas divided by a small valley which runs in a northeast-southwest
direction through the site. The major waste areas are on the south slope and valley of the northwest
elevated area and include a landfill in which solvents, paints, and photoprocessing and plating bath
solutions were deposited; several leach beds used to dispose of solutions containing radionuclides and/or
explosive/pyrotechnic materials; and an area in which a solution contaminated with plutonium was spilled.
The landfill operated from 1948 into the mid-1970s, and one or more of the leach beds operated at least
15 years. The operating life and the quantity of wastes deposited are unknown for the majority of the other
waste areas.
 
The Buried Valley Aquifer (BVA) underlies a portion of the valley area of the plant and is made up of
relatively permeable outwash sand and gravel deposits. Miamisburg municipal wells are within 3 miles of
the site and serve an estimated 17,000 people. There is some evidence indicating that tritium, plutonium,
and volatile organic compounds contaminate ground water, and that plutonium contaminates surface
water. A system of ditches, canals, and ponds carries surface water from the facility to the Great Miami
River approximately 1 mile downstream. The river is used for recreational activities.
 
Mound has a permit to discharge to surface water under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System. Mound acquired Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
when USDOE filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Mound has been evaluated under Phase I (which involves record searches and preliminary assessments)
of the USDOE Comprehensive Environmental Assessment and Response Program. Phase II studies to
confirm contamination are underway.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : EPA and USDOE are negotiating an Interagency Agreement under
CERCLA Section 120 for oversight of activities at the Mound Plant.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
