NPL Site Narrative for Mountain View
Mobile Home Estates
 
MOUNTAIN VIEW MOBILE HOME ESTATES
Globe, Arizona
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 23, 1982) : Mountain View Mobile Home Estates is located 75 miles east
of Phoenix, in Globe, Arizona. The 17-acre site is divided into 55 lots, 47 of which are occupied by about
130 residents. The subdivision was developed in 1973 on the site of Metate Asbestos Corp.'s chrysotile
asbestos mill after the Gila County Air Quality Control District ordered the mill to close. Contaminated
soil was used to level the site, which is directly adjacent to the active Jaquays Mining & Equipment Corp.
asbestos mill.
 
This site, once listed as "Globe," is the top priority site in Arizona.
 
In October 1979, State and local health officials discovered that soil in the mobile home subdivision was
contaminated with asbestos. The Governor declared an emergency at the site in January 1980 and
temporarily relocated residents while the site was partially covered and the homes were decontaminated.
Wind, water, and human activity have subsequently eroded the 6-inch soil cover.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : In April 1983, EPA initiated a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS)
to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. A
report published in May 1983 found that subdivision residents were being exposed to significant quantities
of asbestos fibers from contaminated soil on-site and airborne fibers from the nearby mill. During the RI/
FS, EPA and the Federal Emergency Management Agency offered to temporarily relocate residents on
a voluntary basis pending a decision on a permanent remedy. Most residents accepted the offer. In June
1983, EPA selected the remedial alternative as permanent relocation of the residents with subsequent site
closure, capping, and maintenance.
 
Status (April 18, 1988) : All residents were permanently relocated by March 1985. The homes and other
structures were crushed and buried on-site in two natural depressions. Drainage culverts and enclosed
pipes were installed to reduce the potential for erosion of the cover. A nonwoven filter fabric was placed
over the entire site. A 21-inch layer of uncontaminated soil was placed over the fabric and compacted; 3
inches of crushed rocks were added to complete the cover. The site was fenced.
 
EPA analysis of 132 soil samples from the site cover detected no asbestos or only traces (less than 1
percent), which is consistent with background readings. Physical inspection of the site found only minor
settling and erosion.
 
CERCLA funds were used to purchase the property, which was transferred to the State. Arizona will
maintain the site for a minimum of 20 years. Permanent land-use restrictions have been written into the
property title.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the State of Arizona, has
determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under CERCLA has been implemented, and
that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
