NPL Site Narrative for MRI Corp (Tampa)
 
MRI CORP (TAMPA)
Tampa, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 1996) : MRI Corporation is located in a primarily industrial area of Tampa at
9220 Stannum Street, Tampa, Florida. The facility is inactive and is listed for sale. MRI operated from 1979
until 1986 as a chemical de-tinning plant. The plant operation consisted of four stages: de-tinning, washing,
bailing, and electrowinning.
 
In the de-tinning process, scrap metal was submerged in a series of four heated alkali baths. The de-
tinning scrap was then moved to washing tanks, while the tin-bearing solutions were transferred to the
electrowinning process. The washing process consisted of rinsing the treated scrap to reduce alkalinity
and recover any residual tin-bearing solutions remaining in contact with the metal. This washwater was
then used in the de-tinning process as solution water for the concentrated alkalines. In the bailing process,
the scrap metal was spray washed and compressed into 400-pound blocks for rail shipment. The spray
washwater was collected and reused in the washing process. The electrowinning process started with
settling and filtration of the de-tinning solutions. This alkaline solution was then electrowinned, acid treated
to adjust pH, and allowed to settle once again to remove remaining solids. A chlorination step was added
to oxidize cyanides present in the wastewater. This wastewater stream was then discharged to a drainage
ditch.
 
From January 1984 to March 1984, effluent concentrations of zinc, mercury, oil, grease, cyanide, and
cadmium exceeded permit requirements. Investigations conducted at the facility documented on-site
contamination in soils. Contaminants include mercury, zinc, and cyanide. Drinking water is obtained
through ground water wells. Approximately 15,620 people within 4 miles of MRI depend on ground water
as their source for drinking water. The closest potable well is 1.25 miles northeast of the facility.
 
Status (December 1996) : EPA has initiated negotiations with the responsible parties for the performance
of further site investigations.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
