NPL Site Narrative for MW Manufacturing
 
MW MANUFACTURING
Valley Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The MW Manufacturing Site covers about 20 acres in
the center of Valley Township, Montour County, Pennsylvania. Copper is recovered from scrap wire
on the site. MW Manufacturing, the original operator, used both mechanical and chemical processes.
The company went bankrupt in the early 1970s. The second (and present) operator uses a mechanical
process. The waste accumulation on the site consists of a surface impoundment of 6 acres, 400,000 cubic
feet of finely divided metal wire scraps ("fluffs"), about 50 drums, a 6,000-gallon tank, and a landfill holding
20,000 cubic feet of wastes.
 
The site was first proposed for listing under the name "Domino Salvage Yard."
 
Spent chlorinated organic solvents apparently were dumped on the site. EPA sampling and analyses
revealed that lead is present in high concentrations in nearby drinking water wells. About 1,500 people use
wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
The State has investigated the site since the late 1960s and issued orders for cleanup since 1971.
At present, there is a Consent Order to clean up the site. The present owner, Warehouse 81 Limited
Partnership, has removed and disposed of some of the hazardous waste and processed some of the fluff,
but has not removed the amount specified in the State order.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA plans to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the
type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
