OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST  (NPL)  
***NPL Site***        March 2022 
Cor dova, Tennessee    NATIONAL FIREWORKS  
 Shelby County 
Site Location:
The former National Fireworks property included a munitions manufacturing facility located off Macon Road in 
Cordova, Tennessee. Land uses surrounding the facility are predominantly residential, commercial, and industrial. 
 Site History: 
During World War II and the Korean War (1941 -1957) National Fireworks, Inc. manufactured munitions, including flares, grenades, incendiary bombs, and 20 and 40- millimeter shell rounds for the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) (Army and Navy). In the early 1950s, the former National Fireworks property was purchased by a developer, and in 1986 the site was redeveloped as Cordova Industrial Park (CIP). 
 
Site Contamination/Contaminants: Trichloroethene (TCE), tetrachloroethene (PCE), dichloroethene (DCE), vinyl chloride, lead, and mercury are contaminating soils and groundwater. TCE and PCE are present on site as Dense Non-aqueous Phase Liquid (DNAPL). 
 P
otential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Two DNAPL groundwater plumes have migrated off site and threaten the city of Memphis Shaw Wellfield, which provides drinking water to approximately 79,000 people. 
 R
esponse Activities (to date): 
No response or removal activities have been conducted to date. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Tennessee referred the site to the EPA because of its pro ximity to a city of Memphis municipal 
wellfield. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The DOD 
Formerly Used Defense Sites (FUDS) program, implemented by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), has 
deemed the site ineligible for FUDS program funding. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the 
NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may  change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to  these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) To xFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs 
can be found on 
the Internet at https:// www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
