NPL Site Narrative for Naval Amphibious
Base Little Creek
 
NAVAL AMPHIBIOUS BASE LITTLE CREEK
Virginia Beach, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 1998) : The Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek facility is located in the
Tidewater region of Virginia, near the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay. The naval base is located within
the city limits of Virginia Beach and consists of 2,147 acres. It is surrounded by residential, commercial,
industrial, and recreational developments. On the western portion of the naval base are Little Creek Cove
and Desert Cove, which empty into Little Creek Channel, and Little Creek Channel, which empties into
the Chesapeake Bay. There are several lakes on or adjacent to the naval base, including Lake Bradford,
Lake Chubb, Varian Lake, Little Creek Reservoir, Lake Smith Reservoir, and Lake Whitehurst. Overland
drainage from the sources at the Little Creek facility flows into Little Creek Cove, Desert Cove, and the
Chesapeake Bay.
 
The Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek grew out of four bases constructed during World War II - the
Amphibious Training Base, Naval Frontier Base, and Camps Bradford and Shelton. It consisted of three
annexes named for the former owners of the property-Shelton on the east, Bradford in the center, and
Whitehurst to the west. A Secretary of the Navy letter in July 1945 disestablished the separate bases and
established the Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek with a commissioning date of August 10, 1945. In
1946 Little Creek was designated a permanent base. Little Creek personnel provide support services to
27 homeported ships and more than 80 tenant commands. The combination of operational support and
training facilities are geared predominantly to expeditionary warfare operations.
 
The Little Creek facility employs approximately 12,500 personnel. The population of the base increases
during the summer when a significant number of midshipmen and Navy and Marine Corps reservists train
in amphibious/expeditionary warfare. Some 3,650 military personnel and their families live in base housing.
In addition, approximately 3,000 civilians are employed at Little Creek Facility.
 
Operations that have occurred at the Little Creek facility include: vehicle and boat maintenance, boat
painting and sandblasting, construction and repair of buildings and piers, mixing and application of
pesticides, electroplating of musical instruments, laundry and dry cleaning, medical and dental treatment,
and generation of steam for heat.
 
The seven sources that were evaluated are the Naval Amphibious Base Landfill, Driving Range Landfill,
Sewage Treatment Plant Landfill, School of Music Plating Shop Contaminated Soil and Debris, School
of Music Plating Shop Neutralization Tank, Exchange Laundry Waste Disposal Area, and the PCP Dip
Tank and Wash Rack Area. Wastes that have been generated and disposed at the Little Creek facility
include: pesticides, paints, solvents, inorganics, heavy metals, polychlorinated biphenyls, mixed municipal
wastes, nickel plating baths, chromic acid, silver cyanide, copper cyanide, lacquer, lacquer stripper,
perchloroethylene sludge, soap, dyes, and degreasers.
 
Contaminants migrating from the facility have impacted or might impact fisheries and sensitive
environments located downgradient of the facility.
 
Status (May 1999) : EPA and the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality continue to work with the
U.S. Navy to investigate and clean up the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
