NPL Site Narrative for Naval Air Station,
Whidbey Island (Seaplane Base)
 
NAVAL AIR STATION, WHIDBEY ISLAND (SEAPLANE BASE)
Whidbey Island, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : The Naval Air Station (NAS) at Whidbey Island in Island
County, Washington, was commissioned in September 1942. It covers over 7,000 acres and is composed
of two bases -- Ault Field and Seaplane Base -- 5 miles apart. The mission of NAS Whidbey Island is
to maintain and operate facilities and provide services and materials in support of the Navy's aviation
activities and units. Ault Field contains most of the military activities.
 
The major waste-generating activities at Seaplane Base involve aircraft and vehicle maintenance, paint
and paint stripping, and machine and boat shop operations. Wastes generated include solvents, zinc
chromate, lead-containing paint wastes, thinners, ethylene glycol, sulfuric acid, and lead-based sealants.
The Seaplane Base Site consists of six waste areas (a landfill and five uncontained spills) covering 7
acres. To date, contamination of ground water or surface water has not been documented. The waste
areas potentially affect both the shallow and sea-level aquifers. These aquifers provide drinking water
to about 16,500 people within 3 miles of the site. Local surface water bodies are used for recreational
activities. A coastal wetland is within 200 feet of the site.
 
NAS Whidbey Island is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under
this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The Navy has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary survey) is
scheduled to start in October 1985.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : Contamination of nearby shellfish and sediments is suspected, but additional
sampling is necessary to confirm previous data.
 
The Navy has identified 12 "operable units" (discrete field activities) that will be considered in two remedial
investigations/feasibility studies, which will determine the type and extent of contamination at Seaplane
Base and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
