NPL Site Narrative for Naval Air
Engineering Center (NAEC)
 
NAVAL AIR ENGINEERING CENTER (NAEC)
Lakehurst, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : The Naval Air Engineering Center (NAEC) at Lakehurst
consists of approximately 7,400 acres located in Ocean County within the New Jersey Pinelands. The area
has been used continuously since about 1915 for defense-related activities. Fort Dix Military Reservation,
agricultural lands, landfills, and a State wildlife refuge area are adjacent to the site. Although the size of
the Lakehurst facility and its operations have changed over the years, its major function has always been
development and testing of weapons systems.
 
The facility makes up a major portion of the Toms River drainage basin, and several headwater tributaries
arise on-site, including Manapaqua Brook, Obhanan Ridgeway Branch, Harris Branch, and North Ruckels
Branch. Several ponds, both natural and constructed, are on the site.
 
NAEC is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The Navy has identified and investigated 44 areas of potential contamination within
the confines of NAEC. These 44 areas, selected based on a review of base records and interviews with
long-term base employees, include landfills, open pits, unlined lagoons, and drainage ditches. Several of
the areas appear to occur in, or adjacent to, fresh water wetlands. The Navy has determined that fuels,
oils, metals, solvents, and various other organic compounds were disposed of on NAEC. IRP Phase II
(confirmation study) is underway.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is reviewing the Navy report on the first step of Phase II, received in
April 1987. The results indicate that most of the 44 areas appear free of contaminants or contain only
traces, although confirmatory investigations are required. Ground water at three areas is contaminated,
predominantly by volatile organic compounds and petroleum hydrocarbons. The available data give no
evidence that contaminated ground water is migrating beyond NAEC boundaries or that NAEC's drinking
water wells are contaminated.
 
Visual observations, field measurements, and laboratory analyses suggest that contamination in surficial
soil is limited. No significant contamination was detected in samples collected principally where the on-
site streams exit NAEC. Petroleum hydrocarbons and heavy metals were detected at apparently above
background levels in some sediment samples.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, including this specific site, there are no areas subject to the
Subtitle C corrective action authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. Therefore, this
Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
