NPL Site Narrative for Naval Weapons
Station Earle (Site A)
 
NAVAL WEAPONS STATION EARLE (SITE A)
Colts Neck, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Naval Weapons Station Earle covers 10,048 acres
in Colts Neck, Monmouth County, New Jersey. Since the early 1940s, the U.S. Navy has handled,
stored, renovated, and transshipped munitions at the station. These operations involve preserving and
maintaining ammunition, missile components, and explosives; rendering safe unserviceable and/or
dangerous ammunition and explosives; and providing support to the Fleet Mine Facility. The station also
conducts or has conducted nonordnance activities, radiological operations, materials storage, and waste
disposal operations.
 
Site A consists of 18 waste areas. Wastes generated in Site A include ordnance materials, grit and paint,
paint scrapings, solvent/paint sludges, ammonium picrate, lead bullets from small arms ranges, zinc, lead,
titanium, and small amounts of other constituents. The Navy detected contaminants in a limited number of
sediment and surface water samples, but further background samples are necessary.
 
In 1986, a Navy contractor detected pentachlorophenol in two monitoring wells in Site A, which overlies the
Cohansey Sand, Kirkwood Formation, and Vincentown Formation aquifers. All are hydraulically connected,
so that water can move among them. An estimated 620 people within 3 miles of Site A are served by these
aquifers. A waste area is within 200 feet of a wetland where a branch of Mingamahone Brook originates.
 
The station is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The Navy has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary survey) is
underway.
 
Status (July 1985) : EPA and the Navy have agreed upon a scope of work which calls for investigation of
11 of the areas in Site A.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In October 1989, the Navy completed a workplan for a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the 11 areas in Site A and identify
alternatives for remedial action. EPA has reviewed the workplan and sent its comments to the Navy.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
