NPL Site Narrative for Naval Air
Development Center (8 Waste Areas)
 
NAVAL AIR DEVELOPMENT CENTER (8 WASTE AREAS)
Warminster Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Naval Air Development Center (NADC) covers 734 acres in
Warminster Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania. NADC was commissioned in 1944. Its main mission is
research, development, testing, and evaluation for naval aircraft systems. The center also conducts studies
in antisubmarine warfare systems and software development.
 
Waste-generating activities include aircraft maintenance and repair, pest control, fire-fighting training,
machine and plating shop operations, spray painting, and various materials research and testing activities
in NADC laboratories. Wastes generated include paints, solvents, industrial waste water treatment sludge,
and waste oils. Eight waste areas covering more than 2 acres are included in this NPL site.
 
Navy contractors detected 1,1-dichloroethane, chromium, and nickel in ground water on the base. No
significant contamination was detected in nearby surface water. The waste areas potentially affect the
Stockton Formation aquifer, which provides water for over 100,000 persons within 3 miles of the site. Local
surface water bodies are used for recreational and industrial purposes.
 
NADC is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Navy has completed Phase I (records search) and Phase II (confirmation study). As part of
these efforts, NADC's contractor installed monitoring wells and completed a ground water quality study.
Ground water continues to be monitored.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : The Navy has drafted a workplan for a remedial investigation to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site. EPA, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, and the Navy are negotiating a CERCLA Section 120 Interagency Agreement for oversight of
all CERCLA activities at NADC.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
