NPL Site Narrative for Naval Weapons
Station Yorktown - Cheatham Annex
 
NAVAL WEAPONS STATION YORKTOWN - CHEATHAM ANNEX
Williamsburg, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 4, 2000) : The Naval Weapons Station Yorktown - Cheatham Annex
(Cheatham Annex) is a 1,579-acre federal facility located outside of Williamsburg, in York County, Virginia.
The facility is located adjacent to the York River approximately 15-miles upstream of the Cheasapeake
Bay. The primary mission of Cheatham Annex is receiving, storing, packing and shipping of materials to
federal facilities on the east coast and major distribution centers in Europe. Construction on the supply
facility began in 1942. Cheatham Annex was commissioned in June 1943 as a satellite unit of the Naval
Supply Depot to provide bulk storage facilities. The mission of Cheatham Annex has remained essentially
the same since its commissioning.
 
During World War I, prior to Navy ownership and activity, a portion of the current Navy property was the
location of a large powder and shell-loading plant operated by DuPont. During this time the area included
a city of 10,000 people and was named Penniman. The DuPont plant operated for approximately three
years, closing at the end of World War I. Between 1922 and 1942 the land was in private ownership and
was used for farming or left idle.
 
An Initial Assessment Study (IAS) was completed at Cheatham Annex in 1984. This study identified twelve
disposal sites and potential contamination areas. Four of the twelve sites were recommended for additional
studies. Three of these sites (identified as sites 1, 9, and 11 in the IAS) are included as sources in this
hazard ranking system (HRS) documentation record. A site inspection (SI) was completed at a portion of
the Penniman Shell Loading Plant site in 1999 by EPA. This SI identified sources that were formerly part of
the overall DuPont plant. Five of these sources have been evaluated in this HRS documentation record.
 
The sampling results collected from the seven sources currently identified at the facility indicate
contamination with semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) and metals. The sources are not fully
contained therefore the contaminants may be available to migrate into adjacent surface waters. Cheatham
Annex is located in an area with recreational fisheries. The only fishery sampled to date is Penniman
Lake. The sample results indicate that a release of SVOCs and metals has occurred to this fishery. The
other potential fisheries affected by onsite sources have not been sampled to date therefore the impact of
contaminant migration into these surface waters is unknown at this time.
 
Status (December 2000) : EPA and the Navy are considering various alternative for the investigation and
cleanup of the Cheatham Annex site. In addition, the Navy has recommended that Cheatham Annex be
incorporated into the Federal Facility Agreement for the Navel Weapons Station Yorktown, an existing
NPL site. EPA agrees in principle with this proposal, and will work with the Navy in future negotiations to
determine the most appropriate course of action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
