NPL Site Narrative for Naval Security
Group Activity
 
NAVAL SECURITY GROUP ACTIVITY
Sabana Seca, Puerto Rico
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Naval Security Group Activity is a communications station on
the north coast of Puerto Rico approximately 11 miles west of San Juan, adjacent to the Village of Sabana
Seca, Municipality of Toa Baja. The station encompasses over 2,200 acres divided into the North and
South Tracts. The San Pedro Marsh, a large coastal wetland, is within 1,000 feet of both tracts.
 
From the early 1950s through 1970, the station's Public Works Department deposited all waste generated
at the station in various areas on the South Tract. Materials disposed of included paints, solvents,
waste oil, and battery acid. In addition, part of the South Tract served as the Pest Control Shop from the
mid-1950s through 1979. During this time, various pesticides, including DDT, lindane, chlordane, 2,4-D,
and sevin, were spilled in and around the shop building. Pesticides were mixed and application equipment
cleaned in a sink outside the shop. The sink discharged directly to the ground.
 
Soil samples taken near the shop had elevated concentrations of arsenic, lead, and chlordane in tests
conducted in 1984. Soil contaminants could migrate via surface water through a drainage ditch to the
marsh during periods of rainfall. The contaminants could migrate to ground water through the fractured
limestone bedrock, then to the marshy areas to the northwest and eventually into the sea. An estimated
47,000 persons living in and around the station use public wells within 3 miles of the site as a partial source
of drinking water.
 
The Puerto Rican boa, designated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as an endangered species, has
been sighted in numerous locations on the station. The boa is known to feed in the subtropical environment
offered by the station. Surface water within 3 miles downstream of the shop is used for recreational fishing.
 
The station is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The Navy has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (confirmation study) is
underway.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : The Navy has completed two rounds of sampling. A third round will be
conducted to characterize the area around the Pest Control Shop.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
