NPL Site Narrative for Navy Ships Parts
Control Center
 
NAVY SHIPS PARTS CONTROL CENTER
Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania
 
 
The Navy Ships Parts Control Center (NSPCC) occupies 824 acres in Mechanicsburg, Cumberland
County, Pennsylvania, approximately 7 miles west of Harrisburg. In operation since the 1940s, NSPCC
initially provided global management of Navy ship repair parts. Subsequently, NSPCC has undertaken
additional inventory management responsibilities, which have included managing conventional
ammunition, providing services, and providing maintenance and engineering for the installation. In the early
1950s, NSPCC also became a repository for a variety of imported metal ores. Environmental investigations
conducted by the Navy initially identified several potential areas of contamination at NSPCC. In 1989,
the Navy performed additional investigations, which included an evaluation of the following five areas of
contamination.
 
Carter Road Landfill was operated from 1950-1962. The 4.5-acre area was used to dispose construction
rubble, medical supplies, and gas mask canisters.
 
The 1-acre Building 904 Landfill was used during the 1950s to dispose construction debris and medical
supplies.
 
Ball Road Landfill and Burn Pits was a 7.5-acre area operated from the mid-1940s until 1977. Originally,
it was a quarry in which two large pits were excavated. Wastes, including paints, varnishes, gasoline, oils,
medical supplies, paint and solvent containers, asbestos ash, and Stoddard solvent contaminated with
PCB, were doused with gasoline and burned on a weekly basis.
 
Golf Course Landfill was a 4-acre area used during 1945-46. Wastes deposited included medical supplies,
gas mask canisters, and all shop wastes--potable alcohol and waste oil, antifreeze, paints, varnishes, and
transmission fluids. Occasionally, wastes were burned in the excavated areas. The area is now used as a
golf course.
 
During the 1950s, hazardous wastes were poured directly onto railroad tracks between Buildings 403/404.
Among the materials found in the Buildings 403/404 Solvent Disposal Area were PCB-contaminated oils,
Stoddard solvent, and trichloroethene used to degrease machinery. From 7,000 to 13,000 gallons of
contaminants may have been deposited annually.
 
Navy studies identified numerous hazardous substances in soil at two of the five areas and in ground water
at all five areas. Among the substances were arsenic, heavy metals (including mercury, manganese, lead,
and cadmium), pesticides (including DDT, DDE, DDD, and chlordane), and polyaromatic hydrocarbons
(including benzo (a) pyrene, anthracene, chrysene, and pyrene). An estimated 9,000 people obtain
drinking water from public and private wells within 4 miles of the five sources of hazardous substances at
NSPCC; the nearest well is at 0.17 mile.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
