NPL Site Narrative for NCR Corp.
(Millsboro Plant)
 
NCR CORP. (MILLSBORO PLANT)
Millsboro, Delaware
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : The NCR Corp. Site covers 58 acres in Millsboro, Sussex
County, Delaware. From 1967 until 1974, the company conducted electroplating operations on the site.
From 1974 until 1981, only assembly operations were conducted. In 1981, NCR sold the property to First
National Bank of Maryland. The current building and property are referred to as First Freedom Center.
 
The plating process produced a chromium-bearing waste water which was treated on the site. The
resulting sludge was disposed of in an unlined pit on-site. NCR subsequently excavated this material.
Three concrete-lined storage lagoons were also on-site. Two contained toxic materials which were later
drained and removed.
 
The State required NCR to monitor ground water after the site was closed. According to tests conducted
by consultants to NCR, ground water on the site has been contaminated by trichloroethylene (TCE),
chloroform, hexavalent chromium, and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene. Also, TCE-contaminated ground water is
entering Iron Branch, as revealed by stream sampling by consultants to NCR. Iron Branch flows into Indian
River, which is used for recreation.
 
About 4,700 people depend on public and private wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking
water.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1987 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
The State is negotiating with NCR to conduct the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
