NPL Site Narrative for Neal's Dump
(Spencer)
 
NEAL'S DUMP (SPENCER)
Spencer, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Neal's Dump is located 4 miles south of Spencer, Owen
County, Indiana. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, rags, sawdust, and capacitors contaminated with PCBs
were deposited to a depth of 20 feet in an area about 80 feet by 50 feet.
 
About 1,000 people draw drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site. The nearest well is 750 feet
from the site. There is the threat that contaminated run-off will drain to nearby White River.
 
On November 4, 1980, EPA and the State inspected the facility, collecting both soil and ground water
samples. In February 1981, EPA conducted further inspections and prepared a report regarding cleanup
alternatives and possible costs. To determine the extent of ground water contamination, EPA installed
monitoring wells in the summer of 1982. On September 1, 1982, the State conducted an inspection to
define the fill area more accurately.
 
In January 1983, the U.S. Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, filed suit against Westinghouse
Electric Corp. for cleanup of this site and Neal's Landfill in Bloomington, which was placed on the NPL in
September 1983. The State of Indiana entered into this suit as an intervening plaintiff.
 
In December 1983, Westinghouse fenced the site and removed surface capacitors as part of a Stipulation
and Order filed by EPA.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In May 1985, EPA, the State, Monroe County, and Bloomington reached an
agreement with Westinghouse to clean up Neal's Dump, along with three other NPL sites near the
Bloomington area (Neal's Landfill, Lemon Lane Landfill, and Bennett Stone Quarry) and two sites not on
the NPL. EPA estimates that the settlement is worth between $75 million and $100 million. In addition,
Westinghouse will reimburse the CERCLA trust fund for the $1 million the Federal Government has spent
for enforcement and cleanup.
 
Under the settlement, Westinghouse will remove contaminated materials from an area of about 0.5 acre,
plus a 2-foot-deep buffer zone. About 14,000 cubic yards will be removed. The site will be regraded,
capped, and revegetated. Westinghouse will continue to maintain the security fence and surface drainage
controls already in place. Westinghouse will also monitor ground water in the vicinity to determine if any
PCBs are migrating off the site. Alternative water supplies will be provided to any resident within 1 mile of
the site whose wells become contaminated with PCBs. An EPA on-scene coordinator will monitor activities
at each site.
 
The materials removed from the six sites will be incinerated in a new incinerator Westinghouse will build.
Westinghouse has agreed to obtain all permits necessary to construct and operate the incinerator in
accordance with all Federal, State, and local requirements. The entire project could take up to 15 years to
complete.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
