NPL Site Narrative for Nebraska Ordnance
Plant (Former)
 
NEBRASKA ORDNANCE PLANT (FORMER)
Mead, Nebraska
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 26, 1989) : The former Nebraska Ordnance Plant once occupied over
17,000 acres near Mead in a rural part of Saunders County, 35 miles northeast of Lincoln, Nebraska. From
1942 to 1956, the primary function of the plant was munitions production at four bomb loading lines for
both World War II and the Korean Conflict. The plant was also used for munitions storage and ammonium
nitrate production. Some of the operations used organic solvents.
 
Beginning in 1962, portions of the former plant were sold or transferred to various other entities. Today,
the major production area of the former plant, approximately 9,000 acres, belongs to the University of
Nebraska and is used as an agricultural research station. The remaining acreage is currently owned by the
Nebraska National Guard and numerous private individuals and corporations.
 
The former Nebraska Ordnance Plant is being investigated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as part
of the Defense Environmental Restoration Program. The site, however, is not currently owned by the
Federal government. Included in the Corps investigation are the current university property, the current
Nebraska National Guard property, and the former administration area, bomb booster assembly area,
burning ground/sewage treatment area, and ammonium nitrate plant. In a study completed in April 1989,
the Corps identified areas of soil contaminated by PCBs and munitions wastes, including trinitrotoluene
(TNT) and cyclomethylenetrinitramine (RDX). The Corps also detected TNT, RDX, and trichloroethylene
(TCE) in on-site monitoring wells, and RDX and TCE in off-site drinking water wells. An estimated 400
persons obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site. Ground water is also used for irrigation
and livestock.
 
The Corps is conducting a remedial investigation (RI) to determine the type and extent of contamination in
all known areas of contamination.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : Work on the RI continues.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
