NPL Site Narrative for New Brighton/Arden
Hills/TCAAP (USARMY)
 
NEW BRIGHTON/ARDEN HILLS/TCAAP (USARMY)
New Brighton, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : The New Brighton/Arden Hills Site covers 69,120 acres in the New
Brighton/Shoreview/Arden Hills area of Ramsey County, Minnesota. In June 1981, the State discovered
trichloroethylene (TCE) and other organic chemicals in the Prairie du Chien-Jordan aquifer, which supplies
drinking water to several communities. The plume of contaminated ground water is believed to be 6 miles
long, 3 miles wide, and affect approximately 38,000 residents. Several suspected sources of contamination
have been identified.
 
Status (July 1983) : The State, in coordination with EPA, is making a hydrogeological study of the
area to determine the type and extent of contamination and is also monitoring suspected sources to
determine what they disposed of in the past, when record-keeping was not strictly regulated. The State
continues to monitor contaminated wells in the area. The Department of the Army is making an extensive
hydrogeological study of the Twin Cities Army Ammunition Plant in New Brighton. Both the State and EPA
have met with Army officials to coordinate all phases of the study. The Army is also furnishing bottled water
to homes with wells containing high levels of TCE.
 
In June 1983, EPA signed a $1,467,242 Cooperative Agreement with Minnesota for a remedial
investigation to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site. It is scheduled to be completed
in the fourth quarter of 1984.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
