NPL Site Narrative for New Hanover
County Airport Burn Pit
 
NEW HANOVER COUNTY AIRPORT BURN PIT
Wilmington, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The New Hanover County Airport Burn Pit is on Gardner
Drive west of the New Hanover County Airport in Wilmington, North Carolina. The burn pit is of earthen
construction, 30 by 50 feet, and roughly 2 feet above ground level. It does not extend below the land
surface.
 
The county constructed the burn pit around 1968. During approximately 1968-79, the Cape Fear
Technical Institute used the pit for fire-training purposes, burning jet fuel and gasoline in the burn pit and
extinguishing the fires with water. The Wilmington Fire Department also used the burn pit for fire-training
purposes during 1968-76. Jet fuel and drainage from petroleum fuel storage tanks in the area were burned
and the fires extinguished with water, carbon dioxide, and dry chemicals. Sometime prior to 1982, sorbent
material used in river spill cleanups was dumped into the pit. In addition, fuel oil, kerosene, and oil from oil
spill cleanups were burned in the pit.
 
The pit holds approximately 22,500 gallons, of which 85 percent is water. In January 1985, the New
Hanover County Department of Engineering detected lead and halogenated organic chemicals in waste
from the pit. The nearest well was not contaminated at that time.
 
During an inspection in May 1986, the North Carolina Division of Health Services found barium in the
bottom sludge layer of the pit and arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium, lead, and mercury in soil around
the pit. Trichloroethylene and numerous other organics, including fluoranthene, pyrene, methylene
chloride, naphthalene, fluorene, anthracene, 2-methyl naphthalene, benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, 2-
butanone, and o-xylene, were detected in other on-site soil samples.
 
New Hanover County is currently seeking to close out the pit by tilling the waste into the soil. However, this
has created concern about ground water contamination due to the organic and inorganic constituents in the
pit, the sandy soil, and the shallow water table (5 feet). An estimated 6,300 people obtain drinking water
from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site. A private well is approximately 1,500 feet northwest
of the site.
 
Surface water within 3 miles downstream of the site is used for recreational activities. Estuary wetlands are
approximately 1 mile south of the site on South Creek at the probable point of run-off from the site.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
