 
   
   
  
   
     
   
   
    
  
   
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** April 2009 
NEW CARLISLE LANDFILL New Carlisle, Ohio Clark County 
àSite Location: New Carlisle Landfill is an inactive landfill located at 715 North Dayton-Lakeview Road, New Carlisle, Clark County, Ohio. 
´Site History: New Carlisle Landfill served as a general refuse and solid waste landfill from the mid-1950s until the early 1970s.  During its operation, it received industrial, commercial and residential waste.  The landfill was officially closed in 1977, after several years of inactivity. It was covered with two to four feet of clay.  Since 1993, Ohio EPA has been sampling a nearby public well that serves a nursery and landscape business.  In 1997, Ohio EPA discovered vinyl chloride above the safe drinking water standard in this well. 
rSite Contamination/Contaminants: New Carlisle Landfill is an unlined landfill that encomp
asses between approximately 12 to 21 acres.  Ground water contaminated with volatile organic compounds including trichl oroethene (TCE), tetrachloroethene and vinyl chloride have been detected beneath the landfill and in a plume south of the landfill. 
vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Vinyl chloride contaminated two public wells and two residen tial wells above the safe drinking water level.  The vinyl chloride ground water contam
ination could potentially migrate and affect approximately 15 residential wells within ½ mile radius of New Carlisle Landfill. 
3Response Activities (to date): In 2002, Ohio EPA required the nearby nursery and landscape business to cease public use of the well and limited future use to irrigation. 
In 2003, the nursery and landscape business installed a new public well. In 2005, at the request of the state, EPA extended the water line from the New Carlisle public water system to two residences and the nursery and landscape business. 
}Need for NPL Listing: The State of Ohio referred the site to EPA because vinyl chlo ride was detected at levels above the safe drinking water standard in three wells, and because of the potential threat the site poses to other residents who live in the area. Other federal and state cleanup program
s were evaluated, but are not viable at this time because there are insufficient state funds to address the cleanup of this site. EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
