NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
***NPL Site*** January 2018
NEWARK SOUTH GROUND   
WATER PLUME  Newark , Delaware  
New Castle County  
Site Location:
The Newark South Ground Water Plume site is located within and southeast of the city of Newark in a mixed industrial, commercial, and residential area . 
 Site History: 
The site consists of two separate but potentially co- mingled ground water plumes containing hazardous substances. There are four industrial parks in the vicinity where historical and current operations may have contributed to the ground water contamination. The city of Newark uses ground water wells as the primary source of drinking water in this area. Since 2000, the city has reported contaminants in the untreated water from six of its public municipal wells which are located within the site area. Some wells have been closed either temporarily or permanently due to the presence of these contaminants. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Ground water is contaminated with solvents, primarily tetrachloroethene (PCE) and trichloroethene (TCE), which are commonly used in commercial and industrial operations such as dry cleaning and metal degreasing. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
There are six municipal wells that are contaminated within the plume area. Ground water is the main source of drinking water and the city of Newark serves approximately 13,500 people from this wellfield. The city treats the contaminated ground water, and the final processed drinking water meets all regulatory standards . 
 Response Activities (to date): 
The wells are continually monitored by the municipality and are opened and closed on an as needed basis in order to ensure that the drinking water that is distributed to the residents meets the regulatory standards . 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Delaware referred the site to the EPA to assist in fully characterizing the extent and impact of the ground water contamination and to clean up the ground water. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Delaware. The city of Newark also supports the listing.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices]  For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry ( ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
