NPL Site Narrative for Newport Naval
Education/Training Center
 
NEWPORT NAVAL EDUCATION/TRAINING CENTER
Newport, Rhode Island
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Naval Education and Training Center (NETC) is spread
along 6 miles of the western shoreline of Aquidneck Island, north of Newport, Newport County, Rhode
Island. NETC facilities are also on Gould Island, west of Aquidneck Island. NETC covers 1,439 acres. Prior
to 1973, it covered 2,692 acres.
 
The Navy has used Aquidneck Island as a refueling depot since 1900. Additional fuel facilities were built
during World War II, as were a supply station, barracks, farms, and a fire fighting training school. After the
war, a number of research and development facilities and training centers were set up.
 
NETC is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. IRP studies identified numerous potentially contaminated areas, including the
following. The 6-acre McAllister Point Landfill, along the shore of Narragansett Bay, from 1955 to the
mid-1970s accepted wastes consisting primarily of domestic refuse, spent acids, solvents, paint, waste oil,
and PCB-contaminated oil. Similar wastes were deposited at the 10-acre Melville North Landfill, located
in a low-lying, wetland area along the shore of the bay. It was used from World War II to 1955 and sold to
Melville Marine Industries/Hood Enterprises around 1984. Also in the Melville North area are two waste oil
disposal areas: a sludge bed at an old sewage treatment plant, where oil was disposed of for 6 months,
and two buried fuel tank farms. Another three tank farms are within 0.25 mile of the bay. Sludge from the
farms was dumped on the ground or burned in chambers.
 
On Gould Island is a disposal area on a steep embankment along 200 yards of the west shoreline. Wastes
disposed of included domestic trash, scrap metal, wood, pipes, rusted drums, two diesel fuel tanks, and
concrete blocks, and possibly electroplating and degreasing wastes. In 1982, 10 drums, contents unknown,
were removed from a bunker which was later demolished. The disposal area is in the southwest portion of
the island within 100 feet of Narragansett Bay. This portion of the island is now under State control and is
accessible to the public by boat. The Gould Island Electroplating Shop produced wastes similar to those
deposited at the disposal area. The wastes probably were dumped into the bay. The shop is not accessible
to the public.
 
Lead and copper are present in monitoring wells in McAllister Point Landfill, according to a 1986 IRP
report. An estimated 4,800 people obtain drinking water and 220 acres of land are irrigated from private
wells within 3 miles of hazardous substances at NETC.
 
Sediments collected from Narragansett Bay just off the shoreline of McAllister Point Landfill contain lead,
copper, and nickel, according to the 1986 report. Surface water and ground water flow from the landfill
into the bay, which is used for boating and fishing. Because the bay is an inlet to the Atlantic Ocean, it is
influenced by tides. One tank farm is 300 feet from a coastal wetland.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : The Navy and Army Corps of Engineers are starting field work.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
