NPL Site Narrative for Newton County
Wells
 
NEWTON COUNTY WELLS
Joplin, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (January 19, 1999) : The Newton County Wells site is located in Newton
County, in southwest Missouri. The site is being proposed to the NPL based on evidence that hazardous
substances, including chlorinated solvents and other volatile organic compounds (VOCs) have migrated or
have the potential to migrate to nearby drinking water supplies.
 
The site was initially identified in 1991 following a sampling event at the International Paper (IP) State
Registry site by the Missouri Department of Health (MDOH). Trichloroethene (TCE) and cis-1,2-
dichloroethylene (cis-1,2-DCE), which are not associated with the wood treatment wastes at the IP site,
were detected in two of the residential wells, both located on Moorhead Drive, directly south of the FAG
Bearings property in the Village of Silver Creek. Based on the detection of elevated concentrations of
TCE in one of the original wells, nine other residential wells along Moorhead Drive were sampled which
confirmed the presence of TCE in the ground water. Results of the initial well sampling indicated that
homes located along FAG Bearings' southern property had the highest incidence and concentrations of
TCE in Silver Creek. EPA and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources (MDNR) were notified and
conducted follow-up sampling and analysis. Ground water was the sole source of drinking water for the
people in Silver Creek, Missouri. Investigations at the site have identified the sources of the contamination
to be located on the FAG Bearings Corporation Property. FAG Bearings is a facility that has been in
operation since 1970 and manufactures roller bearing assemblies such as wheel bearing assemblies for
the automotive industry. The facility had used TCE for degreasing ball parts for the bearing assemblies
in the past but the operations were discontinued in about 1981. Various VOCs, including TCE and its
degradation products such as vinyl chloride, cis-1,2-DCE, and 1,1-dichloroethylene (1,1-DCE) were found
in ground water underlying FAG Bearings and down gradient from the facility.
 
TCE and cis-1,2-DCE were detected at concentrations of 400 µg/L and 11.4 µg/L, respectively in
residential wells. Both exceeded the Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) of 5.0 µg/L for each hazardous
substance. MCLs are the highest level of a contaminant allowed by EPA in drinking water.
 
Several investigations were conducted at the site, including a Preliminary Assessment, Site Inspections
with several sampling events, a Removal Action, an Expanded Site Inspection, a Phase II Remedial
Investigation, and several private well sampling events. Consequently, TCE contamination was found
in several residential wells located within two miles of the FAG Bearings property, within the Village
of Saginaw. In August 1991, EPA began providing bottled water to 11 residences in Silver Creek and
in January 1992, construction was initiated for Silver Creek to access the Missouri American Water
Company. In July 1992, EPA began providing bottled water to the residents of Saginaw. Early in 1994,
state funds were used to extend Joplin's water system to Saginaw.
 
Status (July 2000) : Since December 1998, FAG has been conducting an investigation of contamination
on their property with oversight by the MDNR. An additional round of residential well sampling within the
Villages of Silver Creek and Saginaw is also part of the investigation to better identify the groundwater
plume and transport of contamination. Presently, FAG is negotiating with the State of Missouri terms
to conduct a complete Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) and is considering alternatives
for Removal actions for areas where TCE has been detected in soils and perched groundwater on FAG
property. Groundwater remediation will be addressed in the FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
