NPL Site Narrative for Norfolk Naval Base
(Sewells Point Naval Complex)
 
NORFOLK NAVAL BASE (SEWELLS POINT NAVAL COMPLEX)
Norfolk, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 1996) : The Norfolk Naval Base (NNB) is located on 4,631 acres, directly
northwest of the City of Norfolk, Virginia. The Naval Complex includes Norfolk Naval Base as well as other
Naval Facilities. The facility is bounded by Willoughby Bay to the north, the confluence of the Elizabeth
and James Rivers (forming Hampton Roads) to the west, and the City of Norfolk to the southeast. Land in
the area surrounding NNB is used predominantly for industry. NNB provides shore facilities and logistics
support for Navy vessels and aircraft. There are reportedly 260 tenants on the base who support Navy
activities worldwide. Wastes generated at NNB include halogenated and non-halogenated solvents;
corrosives; battery electrolytes; paint wastes; wastes from electroplating operations; contaminated
petroleum, oils and lubricants; and off-specification, excess, or out-of-date commercial chemical products.
In addition, the facility manages used oils, construction debris, PCBs, contaminated oils, general trash, and
materials that contain asbestos.
 
Eighteen potential sources of contamination have been identified at NNB. Twelve potential sources were
not evaluated because sampling data are lacking. The six sources evaluated include the Camp Allen
landfill, the slag pile, the Q Area drum storage yard, the transformer storage area, the pesticide disposal
site, and the CD landfill. The site may include other sources and suspect areas.
 
Ground water samples from the sources revealed volatile organic compounds (VOCs), metals, PCBs,
and pesticides at elevated concentrations. Soil samples from the sources revealed metals, VOCs and
semi-VOCs, pesticides, and PCBs at elevated concentrations. An observed release to drainage ditches
surrounding the Camp Allen landfill has been documented. The drainage ditches contain wetlands subject
to contamination.
 
Surface water runoff from the six sources flows either to the Elizabeth River or to Willoughby Bay,
which converges with the Chesapeake Bay approximately 3-4 miles downstream from the sources. The
Willoughby Bay drainage basin includes wetlands and fisheries. Fisheries within 15 miles downstream of
the site in Willoughby Bay and the Chesapeake Bay are subject to potential contamination from NNB.
 
Status (April 1997) : A Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study has been completed and cleanup remedies
have been selected for the Camp Allen Landfill, CD Landfill, Q Area Drum Storage Yard, and the LP-20
area. Construction of a ground water treatment system has been completed for the Camp Allen Landfill.
Site investigation work has started at eight other disposal areas.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
