NPL Site Narrative for Normandy Park
Apartments
 
NORMANDY PARK APARTMENTS
Temple Terrace, Florida
 
 
The Normandy Park Apartments site is located at 11110 North 56th Street. From the early 1950s until
1963, Gulf Coast Recycling, Inc. (Gulf Coast) operated a battery breaking and lead smelting facility at the
site location. Gulf Coast ceased operations in 1963 and demolished onsite buildings that same year. This
property was then used as an open dump until approximately 1968 when Gulf Coast built the Normandy
Park Apartments. The site has no RCRA status.
 
The apartments occupy approximately 8.25 acres consisting of a northern adult section and a larger
southern family section. On site there are 12 residential buildings, tennis courts, a playground, two
swimming pools, and an office building. Approximately 283 residents live in the apartment complex.
 
In January to February 1992, Gulf Coast collected soil samples and groundwater samples from both onsite
temporary wells and permanent monitoring wells completed in the surficial aquifer. Analyses revealed
high concentrations of lead both at and below the soil surface and elevated concentrations of lead in
groundwater.
 
In February 1992, EPA conducted a sampling investigation and found lead in the soil. Further EPA
sampling in March to April 1992 also found elevated lead concentrations in 12 of the 15 soil samples
collected and in the groundwater.
 
In March 1992, Gulf Coast conducted a second sampling investigation which included the collection of 110
onsite surface soil samples. Analyses of these soil samples revealed that contaminated soil exists within
200 feet of all onsite apartment buildings and recreational areas.
 
In June 1992, EPA and Gulf Coast entered into an Administrative Order on Consent. EPA required Gulf
Coast to isolate areas where total lead concentrations exceeded 500 to 1000 ppm. Two portions of the
northern section of the site have been capped with a liner and 4 inches of concrete. Gulf Coast plans to
cap the entire southern section of the site with a liner and 4 inches of concrete.
 
In the Temple Terrace area, the two major sources of groundwater are the surficial aquifer and the
underlying karst Floridian Aquifer system. Approximately 59,050 persons obtain drinking water from wells
completed in the Upper Floridan Aquifer within 4 miles of the site. The nearest municipal well used for
obtaining drinking water is located 0.14 mile east of the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
