NPL Site Narrative for Northwest Pipe &
Casing/Hall Process Co.
 
NORTHWEST PIPE & CASING/HALL PROCESS CO.
Clackamas, Oregon
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 7, 1992) : The Northwest Pipe & Casing Co. site covers 53 acres
in northwest Oregon in Clackamas, Clackamas County. The site is located in an industrial park and
is bordered on the west by railroad tracks, on the north by a large grassy field, on the east by another
industrial park, and on the south by the Camp Withycombe Oregon National Guard facility.
 
From 1956 to 1985, operations included coating pipes, which involved sandblasting the pipes with steel
shot, spraying the pipes with primer, and coating the pipes. Coatings used in the operation included coal
tar, coal tar epoxy, cement mortar, and asphalt. Wastes from these operations were apparently spilled,
burned, or buried on-site. A large waste pile of unknown origin is in the northwestern part of the site.
 
EPA's limited sampling at the site, conducted in July 1988, indicated widespread contamination of surficial
soil. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are common constituents of coal tar, PCBs, and
some volatile organic compounds (VOCs) were the primary contaminants detected. A more extensive
investigation conducted by EPA between December 1989 and February 1990 detected elevated levels
of VOCs, PAHs, and PCBs in on-site soil, sediment, surface water, and ground water. Among specific
compounds detected are trichloroethene, vinyl chloride, phenanthrene, naphthalene, and anthracene.
Contaminants were also detected in off-site ground water and surface water sediments. A comprehensive
geophysical survey identified six areas where buried wastes may be contributing to the contamination.
 
Approximately 6,100 people obtain drinking water from private and municipal wells within 4 miles of the
site; the nearest well is 0.75 mile from the site. Surface water drainage from the site eventually flows into
the Willamette River, which contains wetlands and endangered species and is used for fishing.
 
Under an order issued by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, the current site owner has
fenced the site; however, it is subject to vandalism and trespassing, thus exposing nearby residents to
contaminated soil. Approximately 5,200 people live within 1 mile of the site.
 
Status (October 1992) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
