NPL Site Narrative for North Penn - Area 2
 
NORTH PENN - AREA 2
Hatfield, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The North Penn-Area 2 Site is in Hatfield, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania. The site was originally proposed under the name "Ametek, Inc. (Hunter Spring
Division)."
 
The site has been renamed because the contamination may be caused by sources in addition to that
identified in the original name. This site is one of six sites involving North Penn Water Authority (NPWA)
wells that supply drinking water to people living northwest of Philadelphia. Six additional areas with
contaminated ground water are under investigation.
 
Ametek, Inc.'s Hunter Spring Division manufactured precision springs, reels, and measuring and controlling
apparatus on an 8-acre site in Hatfield. The facility used trichloroethylene (TCE) as a degreasing solvent.
The facility ceased operation in 1986. The property has since been sold to Penn Color, Inc.
 
In March 1980, NPWA detected TCE and 1,1-dichloroethylene in on-site and downgradient wells.
Background wells contained neither contaminant. An estimated 69,700 people obtain drinking water from
public and private wells within 3 miles of the facility.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : Ametek took measures to clean up several areas of soil contamination at the
site during the summer of 1987.
 
EPA is developing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type
and extent of contamination in the area and identify alternatives for remedial action. As a detailed workplan
is developed, the sources responsible for the contamination will be given an opportunity to conduct the RI/
FS.
 
EPA is evaluating additional sources of contamination.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
