 
  
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** September 2016 
NORTH 25 TH  STREET GLASS AND ZIN C Clarksburg, West Virginia  
 Harrison County  
 
 Site Location: 
The site is located on the bank of the West Fork River in north central West Virginia.  
 Site History: 
The site was used for glass manufacturing from 1899 through 1989 and for zinc ore processing from 1911 to 1924. One current owner of the property is Harrison Warehouse Services Company, Inc., which uses the large warehouse on the property for the storage of recycled paper for a pulp facility. Part of the property is leased to an automobile repair service, and one parcel of the site containing a zinc pile is owned by a private citizen.   
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Soils on the property, ground water and sediments in the West Fork River are contaminated with lead, arsenic and zinc from the former glass and zinc manufacturing processes.  
  
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
There is a large zinc slag pile on the property which also contains  lead. The zinc slag pile is accessible to the public and is eroding into the West Fork River which is used for recreation and fishing. There may also have been migra tion of contaminants from the site into residential areas due to historical air contaminant releases from the smokestacks during the time of operation. In addition, the Harrison County Parks and Recreation Commission leases an area on the western boundary of the property for use as a rails- to-trails bike path. The site is accessible from the bike path.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
The West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection (WVDEP) requested the EPA’s assistance in cleaning up an area along the bike path which was found to contain elevated levels of lead, zinc and arsenic . In 2010, EPA’s Superfund Removal Program stabilized the area and capped it with asphalt.  
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of West Virginia referred the site to the EPA because of the opportunity for both removal actions and long- term cleanup. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated , but are not viable at this time because they would not address the entire site, including the contaminated river sediments. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the s tate.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
   
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
