 
 
 
OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site***                                                                                                                                             Septe mb er 2014  
                NORTH SHORE DRIVE    Elkhart, Indiana 
               Elkhart County 
 
Site Location:  
The North S hore  Dr ive site contains a contaminated  ground water plume wi th no  identified  source lo ca ted in the city of 
Elkhart, Elkh art County, Indiana.  The ground water plume is approximately 70 acres and is located north of the St. Joseph 
River and south of Old U.S. 20. 
 
Site History: 
The No rth Sho re Dr ive site was initiall y discov ered  in 1996. The Indiana Department of Environmental Management 
(IDEM) has continued  to investiga te the plume by obtaining drinking water sa mp les from priv ate homes. In  five 
homes contaminants exc eeded the Sa fe Drinking Water Act Ma ximum Contaminant Lev els (MCLs).  Despite sev eral 
investigations in the area,  the origin of the contam inants is unknown. 
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
The plume consists of chlorinated solvents, specificall y trichloroethene (TCE), cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2 -DC E), 
tetrachloroethene (PCE) and tran s-1, 2-dichloroethene (trans-1,2 -DCE). 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
IDEM  samp led drinking wells from 43 residences in the area and  found 12 contaminat ed residential wel ls, five of whi ch 
exceeded the MCL. About 147 residential drinking wells within ¼ mile of the plume co uld be potentiall y contaminated by 
this site. 
 
 Respon se Activities (to date):  
IDEM h as p rovided c arbon filters to nine re sidential homes for the wells in whi ch contamination approached or ex ceeded 
the MCL s. Oth er investigations have identi fie d potential  sources of contamination; howeve r, the o rigin of the 
contaminants remains unknown. 
 
 Need for NPL Listi ng:  
The state of Indiana refer red the site to the EPA b ecause the contaminated ground water plume is aff ec ting nearb y 
residence s. Listing will allow for an investigation int o  the n ature and extent  of contamination. Other federal and  state 
cleanup  programs we re evaluat ed but a re not viable at this time. The EPA re ceiv ed a letter of support for placing this site 
on the NPL from the state.  
 
[
The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change 
as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these 
substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet 
at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
