 
  
    
 
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** April 2009 
ATTEBURY GRAIN STORAGE FACILITY Happy, Texas Swisher County 
àSite Location: The Attebury Grain Storage Facility site is located in dow ntown Happy, Texas.  The site consists of a release of carbon tetrachloride (CTC), 1,2-dibromethane (EDB) and 1,2-dichloroethane (1,2-DCA) to ground water.  The ground water contamination extends off the grain storage property to several public and private wells. 
´Site History: The release of CTC is attributed to the use of this substance to extinguish a fire when the grain storage facility (elevator and bins) burned down in 1962. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) conducted a screening site inspection in May 2007. Samples taken on the inspection indicated a plume of contamination approximately ½ mile wide and ½ mile long in the Ogallala Aquifer, although the extent has not been fully characterized. CTC was detected in several wells drilled in the Ogallala Aquifer located east and southeast of the facility. One municipal well was closed in 1991 because the c oncentration of CTC exceeded EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level (MCL) of 5 parts per billion (ppb).  
rSite Contamination/Contaminants: Concentrations of CTC in wells are as high as 44.2 ppb a nd 1, 2-DCA as high as 6.9 ppb.  The potable water is in a relatively shallow aquifer. In addition, EDB, 1, 2-DCA, and trichloroethene (TCE) have been documented in the source area. 
Soil vapor sampling in the source area indicates the presen ce of  elevated concentrations of CTC, indicating that CTC is still below the site. 
vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: CTC, EDB, and 1,2-DCA were detected in the Ogallala Aquifer, which is a drinking water source in the area.  Five domestic wells and one m
unicipal well contained concentrations of CTC that exceeded a health-based benchmark.  In addition, there is the potential for the CTC to migrate in soil vapor into homes, posing a risk to nearby residents. 
3Response Activities (to date): In 1991, the City of Happy closed a municipal well due to the presence of
 CTC above the MCL. In September 2006, TCEQ installed a filtration system on one private well that had CT C and EDB above MCLs.  The remaining private well owners were notified by TCEQ of the ground water contamination disc overed in the wells and are currently connected to the municipal water supply. 
}Need for NPL Listing: The State of Texas referred the site to EPA because of c ontamination of CTC in public and private water supplies and risks associated with CTC in soil vapor. TCEQ and EP A evaluated other cleanup program
s to determine if they could protect drinking water supplies, and no other viable op tions were available.  The state has sent a letter of support for NPL listing. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
