NPL Site Narrative for North Market Street
 
NORTH MARKET STREET
Spokane, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The North Market Street Site is in an industrial area 1.5 miles
north of Spokane, Spokane County, Washington.
 
The site was originally proposed under the name "Tosco Corp. (Spokane Terminal)." Investigations
subsequent to proposal indicate that Tosco may not be the primary source of problems at the site.
 
In 1976, Tosco purchased a 50-acre portion of the site, which it now uses as a bulk storage tank farm for
petroleum products. An oil refinery had previously been on the property.
 
According to information Tosco provided to EPA, as required by CERCLA Section 103(c), lead-containing
wastes listed as hazardous under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act were
disposed of on the ground and in holes, probably before 1970. The site overlies the Spokane Valley-
Rathdrum Prairie Aquifer, which EPA has designated as a sole source of drinking water under the Safe
Drinking Water Act.
 
Soil in an old waste oil lagoon in the northwest corner of the site contains high levels of lead, according
to Washington Department of Ecology (WDOE) tests conducted in 1986. (A small part of the lagoon is
on Tosco property.) The soil overlying the aquifer is highly permeable, which facilitates movement of
contaminants into ground water. Wells within 3 miles of the site provide drinking water to over 200,000
people and are also used for irrigating croplands.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : WDOE has detected organic chemicals in ground water at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
