NPL Site Narrative for North Penn - Area 7
 
NORTH PENN - AREA 7
North Wales, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The North Penn-Area 7 Site is in North Wales, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania. The site was originally proposed under the name "Spra-Fin, Inc."
 
The site has been renamed because the contamination may be caused by sources in addition to that
identified in the original name. This is one of several NPL sites involving North Penn Water Authority
(NPWA) wells that supply drinking water to most of the people living northwest of Philadelphia. Six
additional areas with contaminated ground water are under investigation.
 
Spra-Fin, Inc., has manufactured metal products on a 0.5-acre site in North Wales since 1963, using
trichloroethylene (TCE) and storing it on-site in a 550-gallon aboveground tank. This tank replaced a
deteriorated tank which was removed in 1982. The company also removed 80 cubic yards of TCE-
contaminated soil near the tank in 1982 and is pumping and treating ground water by an on-site packed
stripping tower.
 
On-site production wells sampled by NPWA show elevated levels of 1,1,1-trichloroethylene, vinyl chloride,
TCE, 1,1-dichloroethylene, and tetrachlorothylene. On-site soil samples contain the same contaminants.
 
An estimated 91,000 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
There is no other source of drinking water. Wissahickon Creek is 1,500 feet north of the site.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is developing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/
FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination in the area and identify alternatives for remedial
action. As a detailed workplan is developed, the sources responsible for the contamination will be given an
opportunity to conduct the RI/FS.
 
EPA is evaluating additional sources of contamination.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
