NPL Site Narrative for Northwest
Transformer
 
NORTHWEST TRANSFORMER
Everson, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Northwest Transformer's salvage yard covers 1.2 acres
about 2 miles south of Everson, Washington, a rural community in Whatcom County. The site was
used for storage and salvage of transformers, which involved dismantling and draining, as well as
incineration operations. Waste transformer fluids were stored in a tank on-site. PCBs, a component of
some transformer fluids, were detected in private domestic wells near the site in tests conducted by the
Whatcom County Health Department. Although the levels of PCBs were near detection limits (0.05 to 0.11
part per billion), no other source of PCBs has been identified near the wells. Subsequent sampling showed
no PCBs. Further sampling is planned.
 
Wells within 3 miles of the site are the source of drinking water for 2,700 people.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In an extensive soil sampling effort, EPA detected high concentrations of PCBs
at certain locations. The highest was 31,000 parts per million (ppm). In May 1985, EPA used CERCLA
emergency funds to remove PCB-containing materials from the site. Five transformers containing greater
than 500 ppm were drained and cleaned. About 500 transformers were either already clean (less than 46
ppm) or, if containing 46 to 500 ppm, were drained, rinsed, and cleaned on-site. Contaminated soil (1,360
cubic yards) and waste liquid (5,500 gallons) containing 10 ppm or more were also removed. All wastes
were taken to a disposal site meeting the requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
and the Toxic Substances Control Act.
 
EPA is developing a plan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and develop alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
