NPL Site Narrative for North Penn - Area
12
 
NORTH PENN - AREA 12
Worcester, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The North Penn-Area 12 site is in Worcester, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania. The site was originally proposed under the name "Transicoil, Inc."
 
The site has been renamed because the contamination may be caused by sources in addition to that
identified in the original name. This site is one of six sites involving North Penn Water Authority (NPWA)
wells that supply drinking water to most of the people living northwest of Philadelphia. An additional six
areas with contaminated ground water are under investigation.
 
Transicoil, Inc., manufactures electric motors on a 20-acre site in Worcester. Records of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER) show that the facility used several drums of
trichloroethylene (TCE) per year as a degreasing solvent until 1976, when it changed to 1,1,1-
trichloroethane. The company stores waste oil and solvents in an underground tank.
 
In September 1979, PA DER found high concentrations of TCE, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethane,
1,1-dichloroethylene, and cis-1,2-dichloroethylene in on-site wells, buried tanks, and a cesspool.
Subsequent sampling by a consultant to Transicoil confirmed the results. Former Nike Battery Missle Base
PH 91 is about 0.5 mile from Transicoil. In 1986, NPWA found high concentrations of TCE and 1,1,1-
trichloroethane in a Nike base well. Subsequent sampling by a consultant to Transicoil confirmed these
results. Both these solvents were commonly used at Nike bases.
 
An estimated 99,400 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Status (March 1989) : EPA is developing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/
FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination in the area and identify alternatives for remedial
action. As a detailed workplan is developed, the sources responsible for the contamination will be given an
opportunity to conduct the RI/FS.
 
EPA is evaluating additional sources of contamination.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : On June 26, 1989, EPA, Transicoil, Inc., and Eagle-Picher (which purchased
Transicoil in 1987) entered into an Administrative Order on Consent under CERCLA Section 106(a). The
order calls for the companies to conduct an RI/FS. EPA is reviewing the companies' RI/FS workplan.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
