NPL Site Narrative for North Sea Municipal
Landfill
 
NORTH SEA MUNICIPAL LANDFILL
North Sea, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The North Sea Municipal Landfill covers 110 acres in North
Sea, Town of Southampton, Suffolk County, New York. Owned by the Town of Southampton, the landfill
has been accepting refuse, construction debris, and septic system wastes since 1963.
 
The site is located in eastern Long Island near the southern shore of Little Peconic Bay in an area with
extensive ponds, coves, and wetlands. Soils in the area are sands and gravels, and ponds in the area are
surface expressions of ground water. The site is unlined, allowing rapid movement of contaminants.
 
There is a plume of ground water contaminated with heavy metals in an aquifer designated by EPA as a
sole source of drinking water for more than 10,000 people in the area. Monitoring by the town and State
has established that the plume is moving northwest of the site and has resulted in closure of several
private wells. Public water supplies have been extended to serve residents of the area. Ground water
in this area ultimately discharges to Fish Cove of the Peconic Bay. The Peconic Bay system is a major
recreational resource in this region.
 
The town has been cooperating with the Suffolk County Health Department to provide alternative drinking
water supplies in areas where ground water has been contaminated.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
