OLEM/OSRTIWashington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** September  2021 
NORTHWEST ODESSA GROUNDWATER Odessa, Texas Ector County 
Site Location:
The Northwest Odessa Groundwater site is a chlorinated solvent -contaminated groundwater plume of unknown origin with the site center located at the intersection of 54th Street and Andrews Highway in Odessa, Texas. The plume extends approximately 0.3 mile southeast, 0.6 mile southwest, 0.2 mile north, and 0.75 mile northwest of the site center. The area consists primarily of commercial and light industrial properties, used by various businesses from the mid- 1950s along Andrews Highway, with residential areas to the east and west of the site center.  
 Site History: 
The groundwater contamination at Northwest Odessa Groundwater was first detected in December 2006 in a private well located at a vehicle repair and towing company. The private well was routinely sampled during the investigation of a nearby state superfund site, but the chlorinated solvents detected were not associated with the state superfund site. The source for the widespread chlorinated solvent-contaminated groundwater has not yet been identifie d. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The groundwater plume contains tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), 1,1- dichloroethane (1,1-DCA), 1,2- dichloroethane (1,2-DCA), and 1,1-dichloroethylene (1,1-DCE) within the Trinity/Antlers portion of the Edwards -Trinity Plateau Aquifer System.   
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The contamination is threatening the Trinity/Antlers portion of the Edwards -Trinity Plateau Aquifer System. The Trinity/Antlers portion is the primary source of groundwater for Ector County and provides water for approximately 909 people within 4-miles of the contaminated plume. Fourteen wells contaminated with chlorinated solvents are used for drinking water by 149 residents or workers. Of these fourteen wells, six private wells contain contamina tion levels exceeding Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Level (MCLs).   
 Response Activities (to date): 
The state of Texas facilitated public water hookups or provided filtration systems for the six private wells with contamination levels exceeding MCLs. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Texas referred the site to the EPA for a comprehensive investigation and potential cleanup. The source of the chlorinated solvents needs to be identified and controlled to keep the contaminated plume from migrating to other private and public wells. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for listing the site on the NPL from the state of Texas.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
