NPL Site Narrative for North Penn - Area 5
 
NORTH PENN - AREA 5
Montgomery Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The North Penn-Area 5 Site is in Montgomery Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. The site was originally proposed under the name "American
Electronics Laboratories, Inc."
 
The site has been renamed because the contamination may be caused by sources in addition to that
identified in the original name. This is one of several NPL sites involving North Penn Water Authority
(NPWA) wells that supply drinking water to most of the people living northwest of Philadelphia. Six
additional areas with contaminated ground water are under investigation.
 
American Electronics Laboratories, Inc. (AEL) manufactures electronic communication equipment and
components on a 200-acre site in Montgomery Township. Trichloroethylene (TCE) has been used at the
facility.
 
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER)and AEL have detected TCE, 1,1,1-
trichloroethane, tetrachloroethylene, and related breakdown products in on-site and off-site wells. Soils
on the site also contain TCE (up to 50,000 parts per billion). An estimated 106,000 people use public and
private wells within 3 miles of the facility as their source of drinking water. A public well is within 50 feet of
the site.
 
AEL has removed 125 cubic yards of contaminated soil and transported it to an EPA-regulated hazardous
waste facility. In 1981, AEL began treating contaminated ground water by pumping on-site monitoring wells
and treating the water at a nearby sewage treatment plant. In early 1986, AEL installed an air stripper unit
on-site to treat contaminated ground water.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is developing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/
FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination in the area and identify alternatives for remedial
action. As a detailed workplan is developed, the sources responsible for the contamination will be given an
opportunity to conduct the RI/FS.
 
EPA is evaluating additional sources of contamination.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
