NPL Site Narrative for Norton Air Force
Base
 
NORTON AIR FORCE BASE
San Bernardino, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Norton Air Force Base covers approximately 2,036 acres
58 miles east of Los Angeles near the City of San Bernardino, San Bernardino County, California. It is
in a low-lying alluvial plain surrounded on the north and east by the San Bernardino Mountain Range.
The base began operations in 1942 and has served as a major overhaul center for jet engines and the
general repair of aircraft. Since 1962, the facility has served as a Military Airlift Command Base. In addition,
Norton formerly had the responsibility for providing maintenance and logistics for liquid-fuel intercontinental
ballistic missiles.
 
Past hazardous waste management practices may have contributed to existing contamination problems
throughout the base. The practices include burial of drums and other unspecified materials; disposal of
waste oils, solvents, and paint residues into landfills, unlined pits, ponds, and drying beds; storage in
leaking underground tanks; and spills of AVGAS, oils, solvents, PCBs, and acidic plating solutions.
 
Industrial solvents have been used extensively on the base. Unknown quantities of spent solvents were
disposed of in several base landfills.
 
A well on the base has been contaminated with trichloroethylene (TCE). The well water is currently being
used in a blended system and is sampled quarterly to ensure that TCE is below the California State action
level. The water is used by approximately 11,000 people who live and/or work on the base.
 
Norton Air Force Base is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978.
Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. The Air Force has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (remedial
investigation) is underway.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : In November 1986, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board issued a
Cleanup and Abatement Order requiring Norton to clean up one on-base area, the Industrial Waste Water
Treatment Plant Sludge Drying Beds.
 
Phase II-Stage 2 of the IRP was completed in December 1986. It focused on characterization of the
contamination at 18 on-base areas. More than 22 areas have been identified to date. Additional areas will
be studied in Stage 3, scheduled to begin in the fall of 1987.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
