OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST  (NPL)  
***NPL Site*** March 2022 
NORTH 5TH STREET GROUNDWATER CONTAMINATION Goshen, Indiana Elkhart County 
Site Location:The North 5th Street Groundwater Contamination site consists of a comingled plume of chlorinated substances that has  contaminated the groundwater in four municipal wells that supply drinking water to the city of Goshen, Indiana. 
 Site History: 
The presence of chlorinated solvents in finished water was first detected in the city of Goshen’s North well field in 
1993. Trace levels have persisted until the most recen t sampling event in 2018 conducted by the state. The groundwater 
plume is approximately 15.1 acres. The state identified more than 67 facilities that used chlorinated solvents within 
one mile of the Goshen North well field, however the state has not been able to identify a definitive source of the 
groundwater contamination. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
C
hlorinated solvents, principally cis-1,2-dichloroethylene (cis-1,2-DCE) and traces of vinyl chloride, have been detected at levels below the Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) in four municipal groundwater wells of the city of Goshen’s municipal wells. 
 P
otential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Area residents are hooked up to the municipal water supply distribution systems and use municipal water as their potable supply. The contaminated wells provide water to over 32,000 residents, most living in Goshen, Indiana. 
 R
esponse Activities (to date): 
The Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) has identified more than 67 active and former facilities that may have used chlorinated substances and could be contributing to the contamination. Many of these potential source facilities are being addressed under state authorities but no state program can address the existing contamination plume. 
 Need for NPL Listing: The state of Indiana referred the site to the EPA because the site requires further investigation and may require long-term cleanup beyond the state’s capability. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this  time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Indiana. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may  change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs  
can be found on 
the Internet at https:// www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
