NPL Site Narrative for North Sanitary
Landfill
 
NORTH SANITARY LANDFILL
Dayton, Ohio
 
 
The North Sanitary Landfill, Inc. (NSL) site is located at 200 Valleycrest Drive in Dayton, Montgomery
County, Ohio. The site occupies 101.9 acres, approximately 45.7 of which were used as a landfill. Several
industrial facilities, including bulk oil storage terminals, an industrial laundry facility, car crushing facility, a
former industrial plating facility, and a demolition debris landfill are located adjacent to the NSL property.
 
The NSL site, also known as the Valleycrest Landfill, was owned by the Keystone Company, Inc., which
operated a sand and gravel mining operation from the 1940s until the 1970s. Between 1966 and 1975,
landfill operations at the site were conducted by B.G. Davis Co., Inc., under the name of NSL, Inc. Waste
Management, Inc. of North America purchased the B.G. Davis Co. in 1983.
 
Industrial and municipal wastes from the Dayton area were used at NSL to fill unlined gravel pits that
were created by former mining operations. These pits contained water that may have entered the sand
and gravel aquifer that the pits intersect. The following wastes were deposited at the NSL site: electrical
transformers, burned foundry sand, demolition debris, slag, baghouse dusts, plaster, rubber tires,
lampblack, grindings from brake shoes (possibly containing asbestos), waste from a local sewer cleaning
company, and drums of chemicals. Lead, mercury, cyanide, and PCBs were detected in wastes disposed
of at the site. While operating the landfill, NSL was cited for repeated violations such as inadequately
covering wastes, accepting hazardous wastes for which it was not permitted, and accepting burnable
wastes (numerous onsite fires have occurred). These citations were issued by State and local health
departments.
 
According to the Miami Conservancy Regional Planning Commission District and the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency, thousands of drums were buried onsite. Drums filled with used oil and liquid chemicals
were emptied directly onto the ground or into the unlined gravel pits. Many of the drums contained waste
paint or other volatile organic wastes. In March 1985, leachate was observed flowing down hillsides and
forming ponds in low areas onsite.
 
A series of EPA inspections began at the NSL site in February 1986. These inspections included a
geophysical survey of the eastern portion of the site and the installation of 21 monitoring wells in the sand
and gravel aquifer beneath the landfill. This aquifer provides drinking water to 487,000 people. Chemical
analysis of ground water samples and subsurface soil samples collected by EPA in June 1991, revealed
elevated levels of volatile organic compounds, heavy metals, and PCBs. Several residential drinking
water wells in the area are contaminated with various organic compounds. Affected residents have been
connected to the Dayton municipal water supply.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
