NPL Site Narrative for North Belmont PCE
 
NORTH BELMONT PCE
North Belmont, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 23, 1999) : The North Belmont PCE site is located in a residential
neighborhood on Woodlawn Avenue in North Belmont, Gaston County, North Carolina. The site consists
of the surrounding residential neighborhood and the former locations of two dry-cleaning operations: the
former Untz's dry cleaners located at Roper's Shopping Center and the former dry cleaners located at
the intersection of Acme Road and Suggs Road. The dry cleaning establishment at Roper's Shopping
Center was operated by the Untz family from 1960 to 1975. Prior to that, the Untz dry cleaning operation
was located at Acme and Suggs Roads. These two locations are believed to be the sources of a plume
of ground water contamination that extends north and east of the Roper Shopping Center and has
impacted several nearby residential wells with tetrachloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), and 1,1-
dichloroethylene (1,1-DCE).
 
In February 1991, the Gaston County Health Department sampled a well that provided water to the North
Belmont Elementary School and two single family dwellings as part of an effort to evaluate the extent of
volatile organic compound (VOC) contamination in community water supplies. VOC contamination was
detected in the wells. The US EPA Region IV Emergency Response and Removal Branch (ERRB) was
notified of the situation and ERRB collected additional samples on March 1, 1991. ERRB and Gaston
County Health Department collected approximately 25 drinking water samples from residential wells in the
neighborhood. PCE and/or its breakdown products were detected in 16 of the samples. As a result, 29 of
the neighborhood drinking water wells were taken out of service and connected to the Belmont city water
service.
 
During a subsequent Site Inspection (SI) conducted by the North Carolina Superfund Section in 1993,
efforts were made to locate the source of the contaminated ground water plume. No conclusive evidence
was collected to identify a contaminant source. A Remedial Investigation (RI) was conducted at the site
from June 1996 through October 1996 by the US EPA Region IV Hazardous Waste Section. The vertical
and horizontal extent of the contaminated ground water plume was delineated within a distance of one
half mile north and east of the Roper Shopping Center. The remaining unsampled residential wells in the
neighborhood were also sampled as part of the RI. Elevated concentrations of PCE, TCE, and 1,1-DCE
were identified in five additional residential wells in the surrounding neighborhood. Although samples were
collected during the RI in an attempt to locate the source(s) of ground water contamination, no source(s)
could be definitively identified.
 
Status (July 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
