NPL Site Narrative for Nutmeg Valley Road
 
NUTMEG VALLEY ROAD
Wolcott, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Nutmeg Valley Road Site is in southwest Connecticut in
the Town of Wolcott, New Haven County. Investigation of this site centers around Nutmeg Screw Machine
Products Co. (NSMP), which covers 3.5 acres on Nutmeg Valley Road in the western portion of Wolcott
(population 13,000) and 0.25 mile northeast of Waterbury (population 103,800). The area around the
site is both rural residential and light industrial, with a number of other metal-working and metal-finishing
shops in the immediate vicinity, including Waterbury Heat Treating Corp. (WHTC) and Alpine Electronic
Components, Inc. (AEC). WHTC is 300 feet to the northwest of NSMP and performs various heat-treating
operations (annealing and hardening) on metal articles. AEC leases a portion of the NSMP building in
which it machines metal parts and performs degreasing, polishing, acid dipping, and assembly functions.
 
NSMP is a small (8-30 employees) metal-working and machine shop that has been in business since 1951.
Substances used in the machining processes include a kerosene-like cutting oil, machine lubrication oils,
and carbon tetrachloride (for cleaning and degreasing). Carbon tetrachloride and cutting oils were dumped
onto the ground at an estimated rate of up to 15 gallons per day, according to the Connecticut Department
of Environmental Protection (CT DEP). This practice was followed for between 14 and 20 years, ceasing
by 1980.
 
Soil adjacent to the shop building contains volatile organic chemicals and metals, including lead and
copper, according to analyses conducted by EPA. No contamination was detected in water and sediment
in Old Tannery Brook 300 feet from the site. A fresh water wetland is approximately 600 feet downstream
from the site.
 
Local surficial deposits, primarily sand and gravel, are relatively permeable, facilitating movement of
contaminants into ground water. About 10,500 people draw drinking water from private wells within 3 miles
of the site.
 
EPA has conducted preliminary assessments at all three companies and site inspections at NSMP and
WHTC. Further investigation is required to more fully define the quantities of contaminants present in the
soil and to evaluate the underlying ground water.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : In August 1987, EPA found several volatile organic solvents in 10 industrial wells
and 1 residential well near the site. CT DEP is providing bottled water to the residents.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
