NPL Site Narrative for Nutting Truck &
Caster Co.
 
NUTTING TRUCK & CASTER CO.
Faribault, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : Nutting Truck & Caster Co. manufactures and distributes
casters, wheels, hand trucks, and similar products in Faribault, Minnesota. The company began
operation in 1891 and currently occupies 225,000 square feet of space on about 11 acres of land. The
processes now in use are: aluminum and iron casting, machining, painting, rubber molding, welding, and
woodworking. A waste survey by the State in early 1979 discovered that Nutting discharged some of its
liquid and semisolid wastes to a seepage pond adjacent to the manufacturing building. Nutting stopped
using the pond in 1979, then pumped it out and disposed of liquid wastes in a municipal sewer. The sludge
from the pond was landfarmed on the site during 1980 under a State permit. Nutting met the conditions of
the permit, one of which specified that foodchain crops could not be grown on the site without first notifying
the State. The pond has been filled with clean soil and paved for parking.
 
Ground water adjacent to and downgradient from the pond is contaminated with volatile organic
compounds, including trichloroethylene (TCE), according to analyses conducted by the State. Five
municipal wells in Faribault contain TCE, one beyond safe drinking water limits. These wells are
downgradient from the shallow ground water. So far, adjustments of pumping rates have kept TCE
concentrations in Faribault's central reservoir within human health standards. Private wells are not
contaminated to date.
 
The State continues to monitor the Faribault municipal wells twice a month for volatile chlorinated organic
compounds, especially TCE.
 
Status (June 1984) : A Consent Order was signed on April 26, 1984 requiring Nutting to conduct an
investigation of the extent of ground water contamination originating from its property. If necessary, Nutting
will prepare a feasibility study, based on the results of the investigation, to identify alternatives for remedial
action. The work plan for the investigation is to be delivered to the State by mid-June 1984.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
