NPL Site Narrative for O'Connor
 
O'CONNOR
Augusta, Maine
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The F. O'Connor Co., a dealer in scrap iron and metals, occupies
about 5 acres in Augusta, Maine. One of the major operations at the site was the salvaging of used
transformers containing PCBs. The State first inspected the site in 1973, when uncontained oil from the
transformer operation overflowed a holding pond and drained into Riggs Brook. At this time, the owner
agreed to install a 20,000-gallon tank to recover lost transformer oil. On a visit in 1976, the State found
no 20,000-gallon tank, but two lagoons covering 2,000 square feet and equipped with an overflow pipe
to prevent loss of floating oil. The first lagoon drained to the second, which drained to Riggs Brook. Oil
from the first lagoon contains 10,000 to 20,000 parts per million PCBs. Sediments in Riggs Brook contain
low levels of PCBs, indicating run-off from the site is entering surface water. The State recommended
that dikes be installed to prevent run-off from entering either of the lagoons. In March 1977, the State
recommended (1) pumping the oil in the lagoons to holding tanks and (2) excavating the lagoons to
bedrock, covering them with 2 feet of marine clay, fertilizing, and seeding. In June and September 1978,
the owner was reminded of the previous recommendations. In 1979, the State found the material in the
lagoons had been pumped into several tanks, one of which was leaking. The lagoon had not yet been
filled, but the State determined it could be used as a catch basin for oil leaking from a ruptured tank.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA is preparing a Remedial Action Master Plan outlining the investigations needed to
determine the full extent of cleanup required at the site. It will guide further actions at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
