NPL Site Narrative for Oak Grove Village
Well
 
OAK GROVE VILLAGE WELL
Oak Grove Village, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 13, 2001) : The Oak Grove Village Well site is located in Oak
Grove, Franklin County, Missouri. The site consists of a trichloroethylene (TCE) and tetrachloroethylene
(PCE) chlorinated solvent ground water plume with no identified source. The plume has impacted the
municipal well which serves as the sole source of drinking water for residents in Oak Grove Village. Oak
Grove Village is a small community, population ranging from about 402-421, located adjacent to Highway
44, approximately one mile northeast of Sullivan. The site initially was identified in 1986 following the
detection of TCE and PCE in samples collected from the well by the Missouri Department of Natural
Resources (MDNR). The site is being placed on the NPL because contaminant concentrations in excess
of health-based benchmarks have been detected in the Oak Grove Village well, forcing closure of the well.
Residents of Oak Grove Village currently purchase water from the town of Sullivan.
 
Following the original detection of TCE in 1986, MDNR continued to sample the Oak Grove Village well
and distribution points within the municipal system on a quarterly basis until October 1990. Concentrations
of TCE in the Oak Grove Village well have ranged from 2.4 µg/L to 18 µg/L. TCE concentrations have
exceeded both the screening concentration for cancer (7.7 µg/L) and the maximum contaminant level
(MCL) (5.0 µg/L). PCE concentrations have ranged from 16 µg/L to 59 µg/L. Two samples from the Oak
Grove Village well contained PCE at concentrations that exceed both the screening concentration for
cancer (1.6 µg/L) and the MCL (5.0 µg/L).
 
Due to the elevated concentrations of TCE and PCE, the Oak Grove Village well was closed from July
1991 to September 1992. During this period, Oak Grove Village purchased water from the Sullivan
municipal water supply. In September 1992, Oak Grove Village reopened the Oak Grove Village well and
discontinued service with Sullivan. MDNR continued quarterly sampling after the Oak Grove Village well
was put back into service. The well again was closed in January 1994 due to elevated concentrations of
TCE and PCE. Since its final closure in 1994, the Oak Grove Village well has been capped.
 
Several investigations, including a Site Inspection (SI), an Expanded Site Inspection (ESI),and
investigations by private companies, have focused on identifying the sources of the chlorinated solvent
ground water plume that has impacted the Oak Grove Village well. These investigations identified the
Sullivan Landfill, the TRW Ramsey facility (a RCRA site), and two automobile service stations as potential
sources of TCE. Based on currently available information, however, the contamination detected in the Oak
Grove Village well cannot be conclusively attributed to any of these potential sources.
 
Although the Oak Grove Village well is no longer in use due to the contamination, the ground water plume
also poses a threat to the population served by the nearby Sullivan municipal drinking water wells. Over
6,000 people currently receive drinking water from Sullivan municipal wells or private wells located within
four miles of the Oak Grove Village Well site.
 
Status (September 2002) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
