NPL Site Narrative for Oak Grove Sanitary
Landfill
 
OAK GROVE SANITARY LANDFILL
Oak Grove Township, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Oak Grove Sanitary Landfill covers 158 acres in
Oak Grove Township in the north central portion of Anoka County, Minnesota. The surrounding area is
populated with single-family homes and farms. The privately owned landfill accepted hazardous wastes
from local industries while operating between 1968 and 1984. It had a permit from the State to accept such
wastes.
 
The shallow Anoka Sand Plain is contaminated with heavy metals and halogenated and nonhalogenated
organic compounds, according to tests conducted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. A wetland
south of the landfill is similarly contaminated. Surface water bodies in the area include wetlands, lakes,
streams, and a river.
 
There are three aquifers in the area: the deepest, the Franconia Formation, a fine-grained sandstone; a
buried sand aquifer; and the shallowest, another sand aquifer, the Anoka Sand Plain. About 4,250 area
residents obtain drinking water from the two deeper aquifers. The Anoka Sand Plain is not known to be
used as a domestic water supply. A relatively impermeable clay till layer lies below the contaminated
Anoka Sand Plain, possibly protecting the two deeper aquifers.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Under a cooperative agreement with EPA, the State is planning for a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
