NPL Site Narrative for Oak Ridge
Reservation (USDOE)
 
OAK RIDGE RESERVATION (USDOE)
Oak Ridge, Tennessee
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Oak Ridge Reservation (ORR), operated by the U.S.
Department of Energy (USDOE), covers about 58,000 acres in Oak Ridge, in Anderson and Roane
Counties, Tennessee. The area around the reservation is predominately rural except for the City of
Oak Ridge (population 28,000). ORR consists of three major operating facilities: Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, a research lab that includes nuclear reactors, chemical plants, and radiosotope production
labs; Oak Ridge Gaseous Diffusion Plant, a production complex previously engaged primarily in the
enrichment of uranium-235; and the Y-12 Plant, located immediately adjacent to the City of Oak Ridge,
which produces nuclear weapon components, processes nuclear materials, and performs other related
functions.
 
ORR operations generate a variety of radioactive, nonradioactive, and mixed (radioactive and
nonradioactive) hazardous wastes, many of which in the past were disposed of or stored on-site. Leakage
from inactive disposal and storage facilities, coupled with spills and other accidental releases, has
contaminated many areas in and around ORR.
 
Metals, organics, and radionuclides have been detected in ORR soil, ground water, and surface water. At
present, ground water contamination appears confined to ORR.
 
A 1983 study by USDOE estimates that 733,000 pounds of elemental mercury were released to the
environment in the 1950s and 1960s around the Y-12 Plant. Most of the contamination around Y-12 is
confined to the upper 10 feet of soils and fill. Additional studies revealed that some 170,000 pounds of
mercury are contained in the sediments and floodplain of about a 15-mile length of East Fork Poplar Creek
(EFPC), which has its headwaters at Y-12, and that some 500 pounds of mercury annually leave this
watershed. Mercury and cesium-137 have been detected at higher than background levels in sediments of
the Clinch River and the Tennessee River near Chattanooga, some 118 miles downstream of ORR. Seven
water intakes in this 118-mile stretch provide drinking water to an estimated 43,200 people. Wetlands in
the Blyth Ferry Water Fowl Management Area are also near the 118-mile stretch of the river.
 
EFPC flows through the City of Oak Ridge, exposing people to mercury-contaminated soils in the easily
accessible areas of the floodplains of the creek. USDOE has removed soil at several locations along the
creek where mercury concentrations were particularly high.
 
USDOE is investigating ORR under its Comprehensive Environmental Assessment and Response
Program. Under the program, USDOE is conducting studies involving requirements of CERCLA and of
permits issued under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). The permits call
for closing some units on ORR, conducting postclosure monitoring, and evaluating over 500 solid waste
management units under RCRA Sections 3004(u) and (v).
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : USDOE investigations continue.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
