NPL Site Narrative for Obee Road
 
OBEE ROAD
Hutchinson, Kansas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Obee Road Site consists of a plume of contaminated
ground water in the vicinity of Obee Road in the eastern section of Hutchinson, Reno County, Kansas. The
Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE) has been investigating the area since July 1983.
At that time, the State detected volatile organic chemicals, including benzene, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene,
chlorobenzene, 1,1-dichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene, vinyl chloride, and toluene, in
wells drawing on a shallow alluvial aquifer. An estimated 1,900 residents of suburban Obeeville obtained
drinking water from private wells in the aquifer. Hutchinson has connected the homes of the Obeeville
residents to the Reno County Rural Water District #4.
 
Preliminary work by the State has tentatively identified a source of the contamination as the former
Hutchinson City landfill, which is located at the eastern edge of what is now the Hutchinson Municipal
Airport. Before closing in about 1973, the landfill accepted unknown quantities of liquid wastes and sludges
from local industries, as well as solvents from small metal-finishing operations at local aircraft plants. Also,
the Department of Defense (DOD) may have disposed of solvents at the landfill. DOD owned or maintained
the airport until 1963.
 
Another possible source of contamination is individual septic tank systems. Commercial septic tank
cleaners commonly contain trichloroethylene, dichloromethane, and benzene.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Water District #4 is providing an alternate water supply to the Obee school system,
which was drawing water from a contaminated well.
 
Further investigation is needed to define the extent of the problem and identify those responsible. KDHE is
preparing an application to EPA for funds to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
