NPL Site Narrative for Occidental
Chemical Corp./Firestone Tire & Rubber
Co.
 
OCCIDENTAL CHEMICAL CORP./FIRESTONE TIRE & RUBBER
CO.
Lower Pottsgrove Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Occidental Chemical Corp./Firestone Tire & Rubber Co.
Site is in Lower Pottsgrove Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. Occidental has manufactured
plastic resins such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC) at the facility since 1980, when it purchased the site from
Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. Firestone had produced both PVC and tires on the site since 1945.
 
Both companies disposed of their waste on approximately 23 acres of the 250-acre property. The disposal
area consists of an inactive 17-acre landfill, an active 6-acre landfill, four inactive seepage lagoons, and
two active lined lagoons. The four seepage lagoons received PVC waste during 1945-74. The sludge
from the lagoons was periodically removed and disposed in the now inactive 17-acre landfill. In 1973, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER) issued a permit to Firestone to operate
the 17 acres as a sanitary landfill. In 1985, Occidental closed it under a PA DER closure plan; the landfill
was capped with a plastic cover, 2 feet of earth and topsoil, then seeded.
 
Currently, PVC waste is pretreated and the effluent discharged to the municipal sanitary sewer system.
Most of the sludge goes to the active landfill, with the remainder going to the two lined lagoons, which were
constructed in 1974.
 
Trichloroethylene, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, and vinyl chloride were detected in on-site wells in tests
conducted in 1985 by EPA. An estimated 14,500 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells
within 3 miles of the site.
 
The site is in the floodplain of the Schuylkill River, which is used for recreational activities within 3 miles
downstream of the site.
 
EPA has conducted a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site.
 
Since 1976, Occidental has been pumping ground water to the surface, treating it to remove the
contaminants, and reusing the treated water for processing purposes.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : Occidental has submitted a proposal to EPA to conduct a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
