NPL Site Narrative for Oconomowoc
Electroplating Co., Inc.
 
OCONOMOWOC ELECTROPLATING CO., INC.
Ashippun, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : Oconomowoc Electroplating Co., Inc., operates an electroplating
shop in Ashippun, Dodge County, Wisconsin. In 1972, two waste water settling ponds were constructed
on-site, each about 20 by 40 feet and up to 8 feet deep. Metal-bearing sludges have accumulated in the
ponds and may have been removed at infrequent intervals through the early 1970s. During this same
period, the firm constructed a waste water treatment plant. Inefficient operation of the ponds and the
treatment plant, as well as discharges of untreated waste water, have resulted in an accumulation of metal
sludge in a wetland adjacent to Davy Creek, according to inspections conducted by the State. The creek
is a tributary to the Rock River about 1 mile downstream. The extent and composition of this accumulated
sludge have not been determined.
 
Plant operations may also have contaminated ground water in the area. Plating wastes, which typically
contain nickel, chromium, copper, zinc, cadmium, tin, and cyanide, have eaten through the concrete waste
troughs in the plant floor and have also seeped out of the ground near the plant walls. Drums of wastes are
leaking on-site, and sludges have spilled, according to the State.
 
Ground water in the area is shallow and supplies water for all inhabitants in the immediate area.
 
In March 1981, the State court ordered the company to restrict its discharge of metals into the wetlands.
 
Status (June 1984) : In December 1983, the State ruled that the company was in contempt. At present, the
State and the company are negotiating a settlement that would include improved equipment for treating the
company's wastes.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
