NPL Site Narrative for Ogden Defense
Depot (DLA)
 
OGDEN DEFENSE DEPOT (DLA)
Ogden, Utah
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Ogden Defense Depot (a part of the Defense Logistics
Agency) covers 1,139 acres 0.5 mile west of Ogden, Weber County, Utah. Since 1941, the facility has
maintained and repaired vehicles and equipment. Its operations include plating, degreasing, and painting
of metals. The depot also recontainerizes chemicals for storage on-site and for shipment off-site. Various
highly toxic chemical warfare agents are buried on the site. The exact location and quantities are unknown.
 
Since 1981, the State and the Defense Logistics Agency have investigated disposal activities at the depot.
Data from the one downgradient monitoring well have shown no off-base migration to date.
 
Ogden Defense Depot is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under
this program, the Department of Defense (DOD) seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. DOD has completed Phase I (records search) and a geohydrological survey.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The Defense Logistics Agency's contractor is performing a site characterization
study. On June 30, 1986, Ogden Defense Depot signed an Interagency Agreement with EPA and the State
to cover site activities.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
