NPL Site Narrative for Oklahoma Refining
Co.
 
OKLAHOMA REFINING CO.
Cyril, Oklahoma
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Oklahoma Refining Co. (ORC) formerly operated a refinery on
a 160-acre site at South Baskett Street in Cyril, in southeastern Caddo County, Oklahoma. The company
operated from 1920 until September 1984, when it declared bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the Federal
bankruptcy code. In July 1986, an Oklahoma City Court approved the bankruptcy and abandonment of the
facility.
 
During its operating life, ORC placed process wastes, including some listed as hazardous under Subtitle C
of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), in impoundments (many unlined), treated them,
or tilled them into the soil in a land farming operation. Approximately 100 impoundments still containing
wastes and 1 waste pile remain on-site.
 
In 1980, EPA issued an Administrative Order requiring ORC to reduce its discharge to Gladys Creek under
its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit.
 
In 1981, EPA observed leachate coming from the site, threatening nearby Gladys and Chetonia Creeks,
which are used for recreational activities. In 1986, EPA found that a monitoring well on the site was
contaminated with arsenic, lead, chromium, cobalt, beryllium, nickel, and xylene. An estimated 1,600
people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site. A private well is within
1,000 feet of the site.
 
Many of the wastes remaining on-site are flammable or reactive, posing the threat of fire or explosion. Also,
the site is accessible so that people and animals can come into direct contact with hazardous substances.
 
The facility acquired Interim Status under Subtitle C of RCRA when the owner filed a Notification of
Hazardous Waste Activity and Part A of a permit application. This site is being proposed for the NPL
because it satisfies a component of EPA's NPL/RCRA policy: the owner has demonstrated inability to
finance appropriate remedial action by invoking bankruptcy laws.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In September 1989, the Oklahoma State Department of Health, using
CERCLA funds, contracted for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
