 
   
   
  
   
     
   
    
  
   
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2008 
OLD ESCO MANUFACTURING Greenville, Texas Hunt County 
àSite Location: The Old Electrical Service Company (ESCO) Manufacturing site  is located at 500 Forrester Street in Greenville, Hunt County, Texas. The ESCO facility is a former electrical transformer manufacturer within Hunt County Parcel No. 33770. It consists of several attached buildings forming one main building, a small shed and open land on approximately five acres.   ´Site History: The Old ESCO facility operated from 1945 until March 1991.  ESCO manufactured electrical transformers and repaired and refurbished used transformers for resale.  The manufacturing process included the use of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) oil, which has contaminated soil on the f acility property and surrounding properties.  The facility is currently abandoned. The facility is bordered by several residential properties located immediately to the north and east. rSite Contamination/Contaminants: The source consists of PCB-contaminated soil, at concentrations exceeding health-based benchmarks, on the facility property and on surrounding residential properties. PCBs are pres ent in soils to a depth of 15 feet, with concentrations of PCBs as high as 85,000 ppm in onsite soils.   vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: There are multiple residential properties affected by the contaminated soil.  The presence of PCB-contaminated soil has been confirmed at 35 residential properties located immediately north and east of the facility.  The area surrounding the former facility is a residential area, which also includes some small businesses.  There is a potential for residents and children to come into contact with the contaminated soils. 3Response Activities (to date): No formal response activities have been conducted. Multiple sampling events have been conducted at the request of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and EPA Region 6.  Sampling activities were conducted in 2005 and in 2007. }Need for NPL Listing: The State of Texas referred the site to EPA because of the pr esence of elevated concentrations of PCBs in soils at the facility and on residential properties located immediately north and east of the facility.  TCEQ and EPA evaluated other cleanup programs and no other viable options were availa ble.  Releases of PCBs to on-facility soils, residential areas, surface water drainage and underlying ground water require long term remedial action.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
