NPL Site Narrative for Old Wilmington
Road Ground Water Contamination
 
OLD WILMINGTON ROAD GROUND WATER CONTAMINATION
Sadsburyville, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 22, 1999) : The Old Wilmington Road Ground Water Contamination site
is ground water contaminated with various volatile organic compounds (VOCs) located in the vicinity of
Old Wilmington Road in Sadsburyville, Pennsylvania. The ground water plume was discovered during
a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Site Inspection (SI) completed for the Perry Phillips
Landfill site located along Old Wilmington Road in Sadsburyville. During the SI, 11 home wells were
sampled. Laboratory results indicated that the Perry Phillips home well located on the site and other
wells in the vicinity were contaminated with VOCs and manganese at significantly high levels. A well
that provided water to the 60 residents of a mobile home park owned by Perry Phillips was found to
be contaminated with elevated trichloroethene (TCE). Subsequent sampling conducted by EPA, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and the Chester County Health department
confirmed that VOCs were present at elevated levels.
 
Based on the results of a 1993 removal site assessment, EPA determined that there was an immediate
and significant threat to human health due to the presence of elevated concentrations of VOCs in the
drinking water supplies of residents living in the vicinity of the Perry Phillips Landfill site. Emergency
CERCLA funding was made available in order to provide carbon filtration systems to residents in the area
whose wells revealed contamination at levels of concern.
 
Three areas of high concentrations of VOCs were identified during a soil gas survey completed in the
area by EPA in 1994. Two of these areas were on the Perry Phillips Landfill site and one was on an
adjacent property. Two stone-filled trenches were discovered during test pit excavations on the adjacent
property in an area where it is alleged that Joseph Phillips disposed of liquid industrial wastes. In 1998,
a hydrogeologic analysis was completed in an attempt to determine the source of VOC contamination in
the area of the plume. This analysis indicated that there may be an additional source of contamination at a
property located along Old Wilmington Road, east of the Perry Phillips property.
 
Status (February 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
