   
   
      
         
       
 
      
    
      
           
         
          
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** July  2017  
OLD HWY 275 AND N288THSTREET Valley, Nebraska 
Douglas County 
Site Location: 
The Old HWY 275 and N 288th Street site is located in Valley, Nebraska, a community in northeastern Douglas 
County, about 22 miles west of Omaha. “H WY 275” refers to the current W. Reichmuth Road or Old U.S. Highway 
275. 
Site History: 
The site consists of a ground water plume contaminated primarily with volatile organic compounds (VOCs). 
Numerous investigations have been unable to identify the source of the contamination. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The ground water plume is comprised of chlorinated solvents, including tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE) and degradation products. Surface soil samples collected at nearby industrial facilities Valmont and Weichhorst Brothers Excavation Company (WBE) properties did not contain PCE, TCE or related degradation product contamination. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : The ground water plume extends approximately 2.5 miles along the W. Reichmuth Road easement. The Pines Public Water Supply (PWS) well and three private ground water wells have been contaminated. The Pines PWS well was disconnected and the community was connected to municipal water. The Valley PWS serves a population of 2,000 using two remaining active water wells. Response Activities (to date): The EPA installed whole-house carbon filtration (WHF) systems at three residences and a former business where TCE concentrations in private wells exceeded the Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level (MCL). The Pines well was taken off-line due to the contamination and the homes in the Pines community were connected to the city of Valley PWS by the city. Need for NPL Listing: The state of Nebraska referred the site to the EPA because the site requires a comprehensive investigation of the nature and extent of contamination at the site. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable options at this time. The EPA received a letter in support of proposing to add this site to the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may 
change
 as ad
ditional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent 
FR no
tices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure 
to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found 
on 
the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp o r by telephone at 1 -800-C DC-I NFO or 1-8 00-2 32 -4636. 
