 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** April 2006 
OLIN CHEMICAL Wilmington, Massachusetts 
Middlesex County 6th Congressional District 
 
à Site Location/Size: 
 The Olin Chemical facility encompasses a 53-acre property locat ed at 51 Eames Street in Wilmington, Massachusetts. The inactive facility is completely fenced and is bounded on the north  by Eames Street, on the east by Boston and Maine railroad tr acks, on the south by the Woburn/Wilmington town line, and on the west  by an inactive Boston and Maine railroad spur. Surrounding the property to the north, east and west are heavy and light industr ial facilities, and to the south is a former municipal landfill for the City of Woburn. The closest residential areas are west of the O lin Chemical facility along Main Street and Cooke Avenue. 
 
´ Site History: 
 The Olin Chemical property was used for chemical manufactur ing starting in 1953 by National Polychemicals, Inc. (NPI). 
Between 1953 and 1971, NPI was owned and operate d by American Biltrite Rubber Co., Fisons Limited, and Fisons Corporation. In 
1968, Stepan Chemical Corporation purchased NPI and operated the facility until it was purchased by Olin Corporation in 1980. O lin 
Chemical produced chemical blowing agents, stabilizers, antioxi dants and other specialty chemicals for the rubber and plastics 
industry at the facility. The facility closed in 1986, but  the property is still owned by Olin Corporation. 
 Historical wastewater disposal practices were a major source of the contamination associated with the Olin Chemical facility. P rior 
to 1970, all liquid wastes were discharged directly into several  unlined pits and ponds in the central portion of the property,  as well as 
into a man-made excavation called Lake Poly Liquid Waste Disposal  Area (Lake Poly). In 1970, Stepan Chemical installed an acid 
treatment and neutralization system and new lined lagoons to repl ace the unlined pits and ponds. Treated wastes were released i nto the 
lagoons where calcium sulfate sludge settled out. The lagoons were periodically dredged and the sludge was deposited in a landf ill in 
the southwest corner of the property (now known as the Calcium Su lfate Landfill).  Residual liquid wastes were released to an u nlined 
on-property ditch system until 1972. Onsite waste disposal prac tices have resulted in subsurface contamination both on and off the 
Olin Chemical property and the closure of municipal drinking water supply wells. 
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 Principal contaminants associated with the site include : ammonia, chloride, sodium, sulfate, chromium and N-
nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA). The contamination in the aquifer ex tends 0.75 miles west from the Olin Chemical property to the 
drinking water supply wells, and includes a complex mixture of inorganic and about 196 organic chemicals. 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
 Ground  water contamination associated with releases from the site h as forced the closure of four municipal water supply wells serving more than 7,000 persons due to elevated concentrations of NDMA, a probable human carcinogen. Wetlands in the vicinity o f the site also have been impacted by releases from onsite sources. The extent of surface water a nd sediment contamination linked with releases from this site is under investigation. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
 While extensive work has been completed by Olin Corporation to control and cont ain wastes onsite, including construction of a slurry wall around the former waste pits, excavation of Lake Poly  and other hot spots, operation of a pump and treat system for  Plant B, and capping the Calcium Sulfate Landfill, the release of wastes from the site continues. In accordance with the State’s prog ram requirements, Olin Corporation has investigated  the site and performed response actions onsite. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
