NPL Site Narrative for Omega Chemical
Corporation
 
OMEGA CHEMICAL CORPORATION
Whittier, California
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 29, 1998) : The Omega Chemical Corporation (Omega) site is a
former hazardous waste treatment and storage facility that operated from 1976 to 1991 on a 40,000-
square foot property in Whittier, Los Angeles County, California. Omega conducted solvent recovery
using an on-site fractionation and distillation process and operated as a storage and transfer facility for
various hazardous waste classifications. Hazardous wastes stored on site contained mainly chlorinated
and aromatic solvents. In June 1995, before removal activities, the Omega site consisted of thousands
of drums of hazardous waste, two roll-off bins of hardened resin material, hundreds of empty but
contaminated drums, numerous cylinders with capacities ranging from 15 to 20,000 pounds, and various
other smaller containers of waste and/or hazardous waste. Inside the on-site warehouse there were
hundreds more 55-gallon drums that Omega claimed to be product and assorted smaller containers of
hazardous material.
 
Since 1991, the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) and EPA's Hazardous Waste
Management Division have been actively trying to get the owner/operator to remove the wastes and clean
up the site. In March 1995, the site owner/operator plead guilty to two felony counts of illegal storage and
disposal of hazardous wastes. On May 9, 1995, EPA issued CERCLA Administrative Order No. 95-15 to
the owner of Omega and to generators of hazardous waste that had shipped major quantities of material to
Omega. During 1995, EPA's Superfund Emergency Response Office oversaw Phase I removal activities,
during which contractors to a responsible party group removed all hazardous materials and wastes
from the site. Phase II site activities began in November 1995 and included collection and analyses of
subsurface soil and ground water at the site. Analytical results indicated that subsurface soil samples were
mainly contaminated with tetrachloroethene (PCE), with lesser amounts of trichloroethene, dichloroethene
and other chlorinated hydrocarbons, Freons and metals. PCE contamination was detected in soil at
concentrations ranging from 1.9 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) to 510 mg/kg. Ground water samples
collected at the site contained PCE up to 86,000 micrograms per liter as well as significant concentrations
of other chlorinated hydrocarbons and Freons. Phase II activities documented the presence of PCE in
shallow ground water in a plume that extends almost 1 mile downgradient of the site.
 
Although the ground water samples were collected in the shallow regional aquifer of the Lakewood
Formation and most of the municipal drinking water wells draw water from the San Pedro Formation,
California Department of Water Resources hydrogeologic cross-sections of the Lakewood and Upper San
Pedro Formations indicate that aquifers are interconnected within 2 miles of the site.
 
Eight water purveyors draw ground water from 35 wells within 4 miles of the site to supply drinking water
to approximately 284,270 people. The nearest well to the site is 1.3 miles to the west. This and nearly two-
thirds of the wells within 4 miles draw water from the Lakewood and Upper San Pedro formation aquifers.
The San Gabriel River is the nearest surface water body at approximately 2.5 miles from the site. The
site is located in a mixed industrial and residential community, with residences located across Whittier
Boulevard to the northeast.
 
Status (January 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
