NPL Site Narrative for Omega Hills North
Landfill
 
OMEGA HILLS NORTH LANDFILL
Germantown, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : Waste Management of Wisconsin, Inc., owns and operates
the 83-acre Omega Hills North Landfill in Germantown, Wisconsin, in the extreme southeastern corner of
Washington County. An adjoining 83-acre parcel (in Waukesha County) is the site of a proposed landfill.
The Omega Hills North Landfill is one of the largest landfills in Wisconsin, accepting 2,000 tons per day of
mixed municipal and industrial refuse (about 550,000 tons of wastes annually). From 1977 to 1982, the site
was licensed by the State to dispose of hazardous wastes, including liquids. More than 12 million gallons
of liquids were accepted annually. The site stopped accepting hazardous wastes in November 1982 and
liquid wastes in April 1983. The disposal of large volumes of liquid wastes, precipitation, and the failure
to remove and treat adequate amounts of leachate have resulted in the accumulation of more than 200
million gallons of liquid in the landfill, according to inspections conducted by the State.
 
Layers of sand that intersect the bottom and sides of the landfill, after becoming saturated, serve as
conduits, transmitting liquid wastes and leachate to surrounding ground water. Monitoring wells around the
landfill show that ground water is contaminated, according to data collected by the State. Some nearby
wells tap the same aquifer.
 
Status (June 1984) : The State is working with the owner to resolve the problems at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
