NPL Site Narrative for Onondaga Lake
 
ONONDAGA LAKE
Syracuse, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (May 10, 1993) : The Onondaga Lake site is located in the City of Syracuse
and in the Towns of Salina, Geddes, and Camillus, Onondaga County, New York. Onondaga Lake is
approximately 4.5 miles long and averages 1 mile in width. Seven major tributaries flow into the lake;
water exits the lake via a barge canal at its northwest end and flows into the Seneca River. The land
immediately adjacent to the lake consists primarily of industrial properties and county parks. The site is
composed of the lake itself, its tributaries and the upland hazardous waste sites which have contributed or
are contributing contamination to the lake (sub-sites).
 
A ban was placed on public fishing from the lake in 1970 due to high concentrations of mercury in several
species of fish. The lake was re-opened to fishing in 1986 on a catch and release basis only. Population
and industrial growth in the areas surrounding Onondaga Lake has resulted in extensive biological,
chemical, and physical degradation of its waters. In addition to mercury contamination in the lake, analyses
of sediment samples detected barium, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, lead, benzene, chlorobenzene, total
xylenes, various polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, pesticides, and PCBs.
 
Historical information indicates that the lake received surface water discharges from various industrial
processes and municipal waste water treatment plants. Initially, the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has evaluated only operations of Allied Signal, Inc. (AS) and/or its predecessors, and Linden
Chemicals and Plastics, Inc. (LCP), now owned by the Hanlin Group. EPA is attempting to identify
additional potentially responsible parties.
 
The AS facilities manufactured numerous organic and inorganic chemicals. AS's Willis Avenue plant
and LCP's Bridge Street plant (located west of the Main Plant complex), used a mercury cell process to
produce chlorine, sodium hydroxide, and potassium hydroxide. Each plant discharged aqueous waste
streams containing mercury as part of normal operations. Other waste sources include AS's Solvay Waste
Beds containing by-products generated from soda ash production and Semet Residue Ponds containing
wastes generated from acid washing of light oil.
 
Several consent orders have been signed in recent years between AS and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) related to the Solvay Waste Beds, the Semet Residue Ponds
and ground-water contamination at the location of the Willis Avenue Plant. In early 1992, AS and the
NYSDEC signed a consent decree to perform a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) to
determine the type and extent of contamination at Onondaga Lake and to identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
NYSDEC has also filed an action against the Hanlin Group under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA). The Hanlin Group commenced bankruptcy proceedings on July 10, 1991.
 
Status (December 1994) : Presently, AS is performing the Onondaga Lake RI/FS and RI/FSs for the
Solvay Waste Beds, Semet Residue Ponds, and Willis Avenue Plant. EPA has entered into a cooperative
agreement with NYSDEC to provide funds so that NYSDEC can coordinate, manage, and oversee the
ongoing work at the subsites and prepare a comprehensive RI/FS for the Onondaga Lake NPL site.
NYSDEC, together with EPA, has started mailing information request letters to companies located in the
Onondaga Lake watershed in an attempt to identify other potentially responsible parties.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
