NPL Site Narrative for Operating
Industries, Inc., Landfill
 
OPERATING INDUSTRIES, INC., LANDFILL
Monterey Park, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Operating Industries, Inc., operated a landfill on 190 acres
in the City of Monterey Park, Los Angeles County, California. The 45-acre northern section was separated
in the 1960s from the southern 145-acre section by the Pomona Freeway. EPA has evidence that the
original landfill included at least a portion of both sections. From 1948 to 1983, solid and liquid wastes,
some hazardous, were disposed of at the site.
 
Leachate generated by the landfill contains vinyl chloride, benzene-type compounds, tetrachloroethylene,
heavy metals, and other contaminants, according to testing by the Los Angeles County Sanitation District
(LACSD), the California Department of Health Services (CDHS), and the company. In July 1983, the South
Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) detected vinyl chloride above ambient standards in
air at and around the landfill, which is adjacent to a large residential area. SCAQMD, CDHS, and the Los
Angeles County Department of Health Services have taken enforcement actions against the facility.
 
About 23,000 people use wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
The company acquired Interim Status when it filed Part A of a permit application under Subtitle C of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). The company submitted a draft plan for closing the
landfill under RCRA, but CDHS, in conjunction with other State agencies and EPA, determined that the
plan had numerous deficiencies, most notably the failure to (1) provide financial assurance requirements
for closure and (2) develop an adequate plan for monitoring ground water and for collecting and disposing
of leachate. The company has not submitted complete and adequate closure and postclosure documents.
 
Status (February 1986) : EPA collected gas samples in November 1984 from 16 subsurface probes in
an adjacent housing development. Some samples confirmed the presence of methane and vinyl chloride
in subsurface soils. Interior home samples collected in November 1984 had low levels of methane and
nondetectable levels of vinyl chloride. Elevated levels of methane and vinyl chloride were also detected in
a home adjacent to the landfill in October 1985.
 
EPA installed six monitoring wells around the landfill in 1984-85. Quarterly samples collected since March
1985 contain organic chemicals and trace metals.
 
In July 1985, EPA started planning for a comprehensive remedial investigation to determine the nature and
extent of the problems associated with the landfill. When the investigation is complete, various alternatives
to remedy the problems will be evaluated in a feasibility study. Interim measures are planned to stabilize
and control the landfill, including slope stabilization and upgrading of existing gas leachate collection
systems. EPA trucked leachate to an off-site treatment facility from October 1985 to February 1986, when
the State took over.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : This site is placed on the NPL because the potentially responsible party declined
to initiate work, and CERCLA-funded remedial activities are underway. Thus, the site meets one of the
requirements of EPA's policy for placing RCRA-related sites on the NPL.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
