NPL Site Narrative for Ormet Corp.
 
ORMET CORP.
Hannibal, Ohio
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : Ormet Corp. operates a primary aluminum smelter on a
200-acre tract of land on the Ohio River in Hannibal, Monroe County, Ohio. Operations began in 1956. An
8-acre lagoon on the property contains 10 to 12 feet of sludge and 25 feet in some locations. The sludge is
contaminated with cyanides, fluorides, and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons. Use of the lagoon ended in
1981. Other wastes that have been stored in the open or disposed on-site include large quantities of "spent
potlinings" containing cyanide and fluorides, and possibly spent chlorinated solvents. Storage in the open
stopped in 1980.
 
Ground water beneath the facility is contaminated with cyanides and fluorides, according to analyses
conducted in 1984 by a consultant to Ormet. The well that provides drinking water for over 3,000
employees of Ormet and nearby Consolidated Aluminum Corp. is 1,970 feet from the site.
 
Untreated water from the facility, as well as contaminated ground water, discharges to the Ohio River.
Ormet is studying the ground water problem and operating interceptor wells that pump contaminated
ground water (without treatment) into the river.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : On March 27, 1987, EPA and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
negotiated an Administrative Order by Consent with Ormet Corp. to conduct a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site, including the discharges to
the Ohio River, and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
