NPL Site Narrative for Ottati & Goss/
Kingston Steel Drum
 
OTTATI & GOSS/KINGSTON STEEL DRUM
Kingston, New Hampshire
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Ottati & Goss/Kingston Steel Drum Site consists of two parcels
of land in Kingston, New Hampshire. One 28-acre parcel is owned by Senter Transportation Co., which
leased about 1 acre to Ottati and Goss Corp. (O&G), 6 acres to Kingston Steel Drum Co. (KSD), and a
larger area to Austin Powder Co. O&G and KSD reconditioned and rented 55-gallon drums. O&G also
treated and disposed of hazardous wastes. The second parcel, consisting of about 6.5 acres, is owned by
Great Lakes Container Corp.
 
Surface water and ground water, both on- and off-site, are contaminated with volatile organic compounds.
Levels as high as 12,307 parts per billion (ppb) were detected in ground water immediately downgradient
from the site, threatening future ground water supplies for the area. In addition, County Pond, 0.3 mile
downgradient from the site, is used for sport fishing, swimming, and other water recreation.
 
Status (July 1983) : Between the fall of 1981 and summer of 1982, EPA used about $1.7 million in
CERCLA emergency funds to remove drummed wastes from the site. In April 1983, EPA signed a
$572,412 Cooperative Agreement with the State for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The work is
scheduled to be completed in the third quarter of 1984.
 
The Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, has brought a Federal civil action against O&G and other
responsible parties, seeking to recover costs incurred in cleaning up the site or to compel further cleanup.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
