NPL Site Narrative for Pacific Car &
Foundry Co.
 
PACIFIC CAR & FOUNDRY CO.
Renton, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Pacific Car & Foundry Co. manufactures trucks, winches,
military equipment, railroad cars, and anodes on 97 acres in an industrial area of Renton, King County,
Washington. The facility operated during 1907-24 and from 1934 to the present. The company is a division
of PACCAR, Inc.
 
An inactive company landfill occupies the northwest quarter of the property. Until 1964, the facility
deposited waste materials, including foundry sand, wood, metal, paints, solvents, and oils, in a marshy
area underlain by peat and clay. The wastes are estimated to have been buried up to 7 feet below the
surface. Sand and gravel have been used to cover the abandoned landfill.
 
In February 1986, PACCAR, Inc., detected lead, mercury, arsenic, cadmium, and chromium in on-site
soil and in shallow ground water. Renton has wells in an aquifer connected to the shallow contaminated
aquifer. An estimated 37,200 people obtain drinking water from municipal wells within 3 miles of the site. In
November 1987, PACCAR, Inc., removed some contaminated soil containing hydrocarbons and lead and
transported it to a hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act.
 
A ditch on the site drains into the Cedar River and John's Creek. The Cedar River flows into Lake
Washington, which is within 3 miles downstream of the site and is used for recreational activities.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In August 1988, under a Consent Decree with the Washington Department
of Ecology, PACCAR began a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The work is scheduled to be
completed in early 1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
