NPL Site Narrative for Pacific Sound
Resources
 
PACIFIC SOUND RESOURCES
Seattle, Washington
 
 
The West Seattle wood treating plant of Pacific Sound Resources (PSR) is located at 2801 Southwest
Florida Street in Seattle, King County, Washington. The 20-acre property is in an industrial area on the
shore of Elliott Bay and Puget Sound, near the Duwamish River. Wood treating operations at the plant date
to 1906. PSR has owned and operated the facility since 1964. Another turn-of-the-century wood treating
facility owned and operated by PSR (formerly the Wyckoff Co.) since 1964 was placed on the NPL in 1987
as part of the Wyckoff Co.-Eagle Harbor site.
 
Operations at the two facilities have been similar. The primary wood preservatives used were creosote,
which consists primarily of polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and pentachlorophenol (PCP). Each was
mixed with fuel oil. In addition, substantial quantities of chemonite, which contains copper, arsenic, and
zinc, were also used.
 
Wood treatment operations at the West Seattle plant have contaminated soil, ground water, and Puget
Sound sediments with creosote, PCP, fuel oil, and chemonite metals. A significant source of contamination
was a "transfer table," where containers were loaded and unloaded. The transfer table was located in a
shallow unlined earthen pit known as the "transfer table pit." Numerous investigations of the pit, including
one by EPA in 1989, have documented contamination with arsenic, chromium, copper, zinc, and PAHs. In
August/September 1990, PSR excavated approximately 450 cubic yards of soils and sludge from the pit,
placed them in a containment box on the northeast end of the site, and covered the box with a 3-inch layer
of concrete over wire mesh.
 
Another source of hazardous substances at the site is an area adjacent to Elliott Bay where three
aboveground tanks were formerly used to store creosote. A major leak occurred at one of the tanks in
1970. In addition, numerous spills occurred over the years from pipelines leading to the tanks.
 
Heavy metals and PAHs were found in Elliott Bay by the Washington Department of Ecology and EPA
in 1988. Hazardous substances from the site can flow overland from the site to Elliott Bay through
storm drains, direct surface runoff, flooding, and accidental spills or drips. The bay is a fishery, a critical
migratory corridor for anadromous fish, and a subarea identified in the Comprehensive Conservation and
Management Plan for the Puget Sound National Estuary.
 
In July/August 1991, EPA found heavy metals and PAHs in onsite soil and air downwind of the site. An
estimated 150 people live within 0.25 mile of the site, and 175,000 within 4 miles.
 
Since 1984, EPA has issued several administrative orders against Wyckoff under CERCLA, the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and the Clean Water Act (CWA) requiring investigation and
cleanup at the site.
 
In 1985, Wyckoff and officials no longer associated with PSR, pleaded guilty to violations of RCRA for
storing hazardous waste at the West Seattle plant without a RCRA permit and violations of CWA for
discharging wood preserving residues into the West Waterway of the Duwamish River.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
