OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST  (NPL)  
***NPL Site*** March 2022 
 PADEN CITY  GROUNDWATER Paden City, West Virginia 
We tzel County 
Site Location:The Paden City Groundwater site is in a residential area within the town of Paden City in northern West Virginia along the Ohio River. 
 Site History: The site consists of three historical dry -cleaning facilities within the town. The dry -cleaning facilities appear to have contributed to the soil and groundwater contamination. Multiple groundwater plumes containing hazardous substances  (dry cleaning solvents), pollutants, or contaminants have been identified. 
 
Site Contamination/Contaminants: Groundwater is contaminated with the solvent tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and its daughter products which are commonly used in commercial and industrial operations such as dry cleaning. The site consists of co- mingled groundwater plumes containing hazardous substances. The three dry cleaners may have contributed to the groundwater and soil contamination. The town of Paden City uses three groundwater wells as the primary source of drinking water in this area. The level of PCE contamination exceeds the state and federal maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) in two of the three public  wells. The state of West Virginia began their investigation into potential sources when the water authority reported  contaminants in the untreated water. 
 P
otential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: There are two active municipal wells that are contaminated above EPA’s MCLs for PCE in drinking water within the  plume area. Groundwater is the main source of drinking water in the Paden City area. The Paden City water authority  serves approximately 2,985 people who could be directly affected from drinking contaminated water from this wellfield. The water authority started treating the contaminated groundwater in May 2020, and the final processed drinking water  currently meets all regulatory standards. 
 R
esponse Activities (to date): 
The three municipal wells are blended and then treated to ensure that the drinking water that is distributed to the residents meets the regulatory standards. Paden City’s new water  treatment plant was placed online in May 2020. 
 Need for NPL Listing: The state of West Virginia referred the site to the EPA in 2018 to assist in fully characterizing the extent and impact of  the groundwater contamination. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time  due to the extent of the contamination and complexity of the geology. Paden City and the state of West Virginia support future investigation and NPL listing. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs  
can be found on 
the Internet at https:// www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
