NPL Site Narrative for Palmetto Recycling,
Inc.
 
PALMETTO RECYCLING, INC.
Columbia, South Carolina
 
 
Conditions at listing (January 1987) : The Palmetto Lead Recycling Site is located in Richland County
about eight miles north of Columbia, South Carolina. The site is located between U.S. Routes 321 and 21,
on the north side of Koon Store Road.
 
The Company formerly operated a lead reclamation process on the site. Lead was obtained from spent
lead acid storage batteries. In the early 1980's, the facility filed for bankruptcy and the site was abandoned.
Wastes remaining at the site include an unlined acid storage sump, 100 drums of liquid caustic, and an
unstablized pile of battery casing scraps.
 
The site is located in a rural area with a population of about 5,300 people within a three-mile radius.
Drinking water is obtained primarily from the Richtex Formation from depths ranging from less than 50 feet
to several hundred feet below land surface. The site is surrounded by numerous lakes, streams, and rivers,
with the nearest surface water body being the North Branch of Crane Creek. The creek is located about
100 yards east of the site and eventually flows into the Broad River. No wetlands or critical habitats are
known to be within the vicinity of the site.
 
Status (July 1987) : Palmetto Recycling, Inc. is currently under legal action from the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control for the removal of the drums containing caustic waste
and proper disposal of the contaminated waste pile. The enforcement action was issued under the
authority of the South Carolina Pollution Control and Hazardous Waste Act.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
