NPL Site Narrative for Paoli Rail Yard
 
PAOLI RAIL YARD
Paoli, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Paoli Rail Yard covers about 30 acres in Paoli, Chester
County, Pennsylvania. The yard consists of an electric train repair facility owned by Amtrak and operated
by the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA). Routine maintenance and repair
of railroad cars involve PCB-containing electrical equipment. The yard is surrounded on three sides by
residential communities and on the fourth by commercial facilities. Until February 1986, people used the
yard as a shortcut to the station and commercial properties.
 
In the late 1970s, both EPA and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER)
inspected the Paoli Rail Yard. This inspection, coupled with subsequent State investigations, led PA DER
to issue an order in 1979 requiring Amtrak, SEPTA, and Conrail to determine the extent of contamination
and correct any problem areas. The companies took actions primarily involving collection of samples, some
cleanup, and further study.
 
In November 1985, analyses of samples taken in July 1984 by a consultant to the companies were
provided to EPA. They indicated a severe PCB problem, with soil contamination as high as 3 percent and
to depths of up to 3 feet.
 
In December 1985, a team consisting of staff from EPA, the U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry, and the State Health Department made a preliminary assessment to verify the existing
sample results and identify areas of most concern.
 
On February 25, 1986, EPA filed a complaint under the Toxic Substances Control Act, CERCLA, and the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The complaint sought an order requiring the three companies to
limit access to the yard, control migration of PCBs, conduct sampling and analysis, and take measures to
clean up the yard and protect worker safety. A security fence was installed as a preliminary measure.
 
In June 1986, a second agreement was reached requiring the companies to develop a plan to control
erosion, sedimentation, and contaminated ground water. In the fall of 1986, EPA used $600,000 in
CERCLA emergency funds to remove contaminated soil in nearby areas and control erosion on the yard.
 
Status (June 24, 1988) : Under a May 1987 agreement with EPA, the three companies are conducting a
remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the extent of contamination. Under a separate
agreement, SEPTA has taken measures to protect workers in the repair shop at a cost of $2 million.
In October 1987, the three companies agreed to conduct extensive soil sampling in the surrounding
neighborhoods, and in January 1988, EPA's emergency program began additional measures to stabilize
the yard and nearby Central Avenue.
 
After this site was proposed, additional technical information became available. Hence, EPA is reproposing
the site to allow an additional 60-day comment period.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : The three companies have completed most of the field work for the RI. RI
sampling was extended to investigate oil contamination of ground water discovered in 1989. The RI report
is expected shortly.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
