NPL Site Narrative for Parker Sanitary
Landfill
 
PARKER SANITARY LANDFILL
Lyndon, Vermont
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Parker Sanitary Landfill covers 25 acres in the southeastern
portion of the Town of Lyndon, Caledonia County, Vermont. Ray O. Parker and Son, Inc., has owned
and operated the site as a solid waste landfill since 1972, when it received a permit from the Vermont
Department of Environmental Conservation (VT DEC) to accept solid waste.
 
Prior to 1983, according to a VT DEC report (1985), approximately 1.3 million gallons of liquid wastes
plus 760 tons of solid or semisolid wastes, including metal plating rinse waters, waste oils, electroplating
sludges, paint sludges, chlorinated solvent sludges, caustic cleaners, and metallic salts, were disposed of
in three areas of the landfill. Liquid and sludge wastes were poured directly onto the ground or into unlined
pits and lagoons. The wastes came primarily from Northeast Tool, Vermont Tap and Die (both a part of
Vermont American Corp. and both in Lyndonville), and Colt Industries (in nearby St. Johnsbury), according
to VT DEC.
 
During a site inspection in May 1984, VT DEC detected trichloroethane, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, 1,1,1-
trichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethane, and tetrachloroethylene in an unnamed stream bordering the landfill to
the north and east, in ground water at the landfill, and in four private wells 0.5 mile southwest of the landfill.
A study of area hydrology conducted by VT DEC indicates that contamination is coming from the landfill.
An estimated 3,200 people obtain drinking water from a municipal well field 1.75 miles north of the landfill;
124 private wells are within 3 miles of the landfill.
 
The unnamed stream flows into the Passumpsic River, which is used for recreational activities. The
site is not fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with hazardous
substances.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : EPA has issued general notice letters to parties potentially responsible for
waste associated with the site informing them of their potential liability.
 
VT DEC is reviewing applications for continued operations of the landfill and construction of an emergency
lined landfill adjacent to the present landfill.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
