OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch 
Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** April 2006 
PARKVIEW WELL Grand Island, Nebraska
 Hall County 3rd Congressional District 
à Site Location/Size: 
The Parkview Well area is located near the southwest corner of the City of Grand Island, Hall County, Nebraska. Investigations have identified two plumes of contaminated groundwater that extend towards the Parkview subdivision:  a southern plume extends from an area west  of the Maryland, Kentish Hills, and Castle Estates subdivisions to the east, and a northern plume extends from  the Case New Holland (CNH, an agricultural combine manufacturer) property to the east. 
´ Site History: 
The southern plume is located in an area that is a mixtur e of industrial, agricultural, residential and commercial land uses. Agricultural equipment manufacturing operations have been conducted by CNH at its facility since 1991, and by other corporate entities since 1965. From 1966 to 1975, paint sludge, spent solvents, waste oil, waste machine coolants and other waste material were disposed of in the burn ar ea on the property.  From 1975 to 1980, plant operations included burying both containerized and noncontainerized paint sludge, spen t solvents, waste oil, waste machine coolants, and other liquid and semiliquid waste in the burial area. In 1991, CNH c ontractors identified burn and burial areas in the southern portion of the property impacted by past wa ste disposal practices at the property.  
Routine monitoring first detected volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in a nearby municipal well in 1999. In 2001, the contamination in the public well exceeded health-based benchm arks and the City found contamination in numerous private wells around the Parkview subdivision. A few of those private wells showed contamination exceeding EPA’s Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL). In 2002, CNH investigated its prope rty and found significantly elevated levels of VOCs in soil and ground water. Additional sampling in 2003 by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the City found many more private drinking water wells with contamination exceeding MCLs. 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The main contaminants of concern are VOCs, specifica lly 1,1-dichloroethylene (1,1-DCE) and tetrachloroethylene (PCE). 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: 
Seventy-four private drinking water wells and one munici pal well contain ground water contaminated with VOCs at levels exceeding health-based standards, impacting approxi mately 1,384 individuals. In addition, 69 private drinking water wells, which supply drinking water to approximately 179 i ndividuals, have been documented to contain VOCs at significantly elevated levels. 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
EPA is performing a remedial investigation for the southe rn plume area of the site, as well as a focused feasibility study. Alternative water or filtration systems are currently be ing provided to those whose drinking water is contaminated. On November 3, 2000, CNH entered into Ne braska Department of Environmental Quality’s (NDEQ) Remedial Action Plan Monitoring Act program. CNH is also performing a remedi al investigation for the northern plume area of the site.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
