NPL Site Narrative for Parsons Casket
Hardware Co.
 
PARSONS CASKET HARDWARE CO.
Belvidere, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Parsons Casket Hardware Co. Site covers
approximately 2 acres in a residential area of Belvidere, Boone County, Illinois. Parsons used an
electroplating process for manufacturing metal fittings for caskets from 1898 until August 1982, when it
filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the Federal bankruptcy code.
 
Wastes generated by Parsons included electroplating sludge, cyanide plating solutions, cyanide
cleaning solutions, and bronze, nickel, and brass sludges. In 1982, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency (IEPA) found that approximately 120 drums of various sizes were stored inside and outside the
manufacturing building. Many were dented, corroded, leaking, or had no lids; 34 had originated from
Parsons' parent company, Dickey Grabler Co. of Cleveland, Ohio. About 4,800 gallons of wastes were
stored in above- and below-ground tanks. An unlined lagoon contained approximately 166,500 gallons of
liquid wastes and 1,230 cubic yards of sludges. The wastes had high levels of lead, copper, cyanide, and
nickel, as did monitoring wells around the lagoon, according to EPA analyses.
 
Municipal wells within 3 miles of the site are the sole source of drinking water for Belvidere's 15,200
residents, and all are potentially at risk of contamination. The nearest well is 1,500 feet from the site. The
Kishwaukee River, which is used for fishing and recreation, is approximately 1,400 feet from the site.
 
Before Parsons filed for bankruptcy, the State ordered it to repackage all leaking drums and move them
indoors. In October 1984, the State began cleaning up the lagoon, completing the operation in the spring
of 1985. On December 7, 1984, Filter Systems, Inc., of Addison, Illinois, purchased the on-site building and
agreed to recycle or remove the drums stored in the building. Filter Systems has removed the drums.
 
In July 1985, soil taken from the lagoon cleanup area still contained high levels of cyanide, nickel, and
copper, according to EPA. No plans have yet been formalized to deal with that problem.
 
The plant acquired Interim Status when Parsons filed Part A of a permit application under Subtitle C of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
 
This site is being proposed for the NPL because it satisfies a component of the NPL/RCRA policy: the
owner or operator has demonstrated inability to finance appropriate remedial action by invoking bankruptcy
laws.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
