NPL Site Narrative for Pasley Solvents &
Chemicals, Inc.
 
PASLEY SOLVENTS & CHEMICALS, INC.
Hempstead, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Pasley Solvents & Chemicals, Inc., Site covers
about 0.5 acre in Hempstead, Nassau County, New York. Barlo Equipment Co. leased the property and
subsequently subleased it to Pasley Solvents. Pasley operated as a chemical distribution facility from 1969
through mid-1982 and reportedly stored various organic chemicals, including aliphatic naphthas, aromatic
solvents, and ketones. Prior to 1969, the site was occupied by Commander Oil, a distributor of fuel oil and
gasoline. The site consists of a large one-story building, a tin shed, a small building, and 12 above-ground
tanks.
 
In June 1981, the Nassau County Health Department collected soil samples beneath the tanks at depths of
6 inches to 36 inches. Analyses of the samples indicated that the soil was contaminated with halogenated
and nonhalogenated organic compounds. Five monitoring wells were installed at the site in August 1981.
Analyses of soil and ground water from wells 2, 4, and 5 detected halogenated and nonhalogenated
organic compounds, as well as constituents of fuel oil and gasoline. The nearest well is less than 0.5 mile
from the site. About 12,000 people draw drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Nassau County has cited both Commander Oil and Pasley Solvents for various violations but without any
resulting follow-up action.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
