NPL Site Narrative for PCB Wastes
 
PCB WASTES
Palikir, Federated States of Micronesia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 23, 1981) : The Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, an area larger
than the continental United States, has eight separate areas for storing transformers contaminated with
PCBs. The sites were located on the islands of Koror in the Republic of Palau, Moen in Truk State, Yap,
Kosrae, and two on both Ponape and Majuro. The storage areas, which hold more than 2,000 gallons of
wastes, are unprotected and could contaminate ground water and surface water used as drinking water.
Contamination of marine resources used for food could also result. Wastes migrating from some of these
sites may already have contaminated the surrounding area.
 
This is the top priority site in the Trust Territory.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : A remedial investigation conducted by EPA in December 1982 revealed
that the PCBs in drums and transformers and some pesticides and chemicals were improperly stored. A
previous oil spill was apparent at one location formerly used to store transformers. In some locations, intact
containers of transformer oil were in unsecured areas open to the general public.
 
Status (March 7, 1986) : In 1984, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to remove wastes containing over
50 parts per million (ppm) of PCBs and the other hazardous wastes found at the various locations. During
the removal action, soils and waste oils were sampled in the field using a portable testing kit that allowed
segregation of wastes for transport. Only the transformer storage area had contaminated soils. It is located
in a fenced-in rural area. Testing was conducted in the area before and after removal of contaminated
soils. No PCBs above 50 ppm were found in structures or soils after removal.
 
Fluids containing under 50 ppm of PCBs were blended and burned on the islands. Other PCB wastes
were transported to a disposal facility in the continental United States meeting the requirements of the
Toxic Substances Control Act. Other hazardous wastes were removed and transported to a facility in the
continental United States permitted under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the Trust Territory of the Pacific
Islands, has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under CERCLA has been
implemented, and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
