NPL Site Narrative for PCB Spills
 
PCB SPILLS
243 Miles of Road in North Carolina, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 23, 1981) : Between June and August 1978, over 30,000 gallons of
industrial waste containing PCBs were deliberately discharged along approximately 243 noncontiguous
miles of highway shoulders in 14 counties of North Carolina. In late August, the State covered the
spill areas with activated charcoal and liquid asphalt. Because of the quantity of soils involved and the
distances to approved landfills, the State decided to construct a new landfill. In December 1978, North
Carolina sought EPA approval for a PCB landfill in Warren County. EPA approved the landfill site in June
1979, subject to compliance with a number of technical and procedural conditions.
 
The State conducted several investigations and feasibility studies between 1979 and 1981 and ascertained
that contamination did not migrate from the spill areas into surface water, biota, or ground water.
 
This is the top priority site in North Carolina.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : In May 1982, EPA and the State initiated remedial action to: (1) construct
a landfill meeting the requirements of the Toxic Substances Control Act for disposal of PCB wastes;
(2) remove, transport, and dispose of contaminated soils; and (3) reconstruct the highway shoulders.
Disposal of contaminated soil was completed in November 1982, and the landfill was capped, graded, and
vegetated. During soil removal, the beginning and end points of each contaminated strip were sampled to
ensure that contaminated soils were removed.
 
Status (March 7, 1986) : Analyses indicated that nearly all soil samples contained 10 parts per million
(ppm) or less of PCBs. No soils with PCBs above 50 ppm were left in place. Excavated areas were then
filled with clean soil.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the State of North Carolina,
has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under CERCLA has been implemented,
and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate. The State is currently monitoring the
landfill constructed to contain contaminated soils removed from the site. The results indicate that the landfill
continues to meet all requirements for postclosure monitoring.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
