NPL Site Narrative for PCB Warehouse
 
PCB WAREHOUSE
Garapan, Commonwealth of Northern Marianas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 23, 1981) : The PCB Warehouse on Saipan, Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands, is a temporary shelter built to store about 1,400 gallons of transformer fluid
containing up to 25,000 parts per million of PCBs. The fluid is stored in drums awaiting shipment or off-
site disposal. The storage site is adjacent to the Philippine Sea, an area subject to tropical storms. PCB
contamination of drinking water and marine resources used for food is of concern.
 
This is the top priority site in the Northern Mariana Islands.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : A remedial investigation of the site conducted by EPA in December 1982
revealed the presence of 21 drums of PCB-contaminated oil and 3 crates of sodium arsenite. Drums were
found to be intact, and there was no evidence of any reported spills or leaks. The transformers from which
the oil had been drained were at the Saipan Headquarters Building and at the Department of Public Works
Yard. There was no indication of leaks or spills near those transformers.
 
Status (March 7, 1986) : In 1984, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to remove the 21 drums of PCB
wastes and 3 crates of sodium arsenite. These were repackaged and transported to the continental United
States. The PCB wastes were disposed of at a facility meeting the requirements of the Toxic Substances
Control Act. The sodium arsenite was disposed of at a facility permitted under Subtitle C of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act. Tests confirmed that no PCB wastes had been spilled during the removal
action.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands, has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under
CERCLA has been implemented, and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
