 
 
 
OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONA L PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
*** Final Site***  May 2014  
PCE SOUTHEAST CONTAM INATION  York, Nebraska   
 York County  
 
 Site Location : 
The PCE Southeast Contamination site includes the central and southeastern portions of the city of York, Nebraska, which 
includes an industrial and urban residential area, and a rural residential area just outside of the southeastern portion of the 
city limits. 
 
 Site History:  
Preliminary Assessment and Site Inspection activities have been conducted at the site. The PCE Southeast Contamination 
site is a ground  water plume.  The site is composed of documented releases of hazardous substances, mainly volatile organic 
compounds (VOCs), into soils and ground water. There are many possible sources resulting from various operations such 
as dry cleaners, metal degreasing operations and grain storage facilities. One municipal water supply well has been 
contaminated and taken off line. The plume has also contaminat ed three private residential water supply wells, which have 
req uired  the provision of alternate water. 
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
The ground water plume is comprised of chlorinated solvents, including but not limited to: tetrachloroethene (PCE), 
trichloroethene (TCE), and their degradation products. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surr ounding Community/Environment : 
The ground water plume extends approximately 2 miles . There are several private water supply wells and irrigation wells in 
danger of becoming contaminated because they are located down-gradient of the ground water plume.  
 
 Response Activities (to date):  
There is an ongoing removal action at PCE Southeast Contamination site to provide alternate water to impacted residences. 
The EPA has provided alternate water to three residences at the request of the state of Nebraska.  
 
 Need for NPL Listing:  
The state of Nebraska referred the site to the EPA because the site requires short-term and long-term response actions and 
listing will provide for investigation into the nature and extent of contamination and, if necessary, remediation of the site. 
Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable options at this time. The EPA received a letter 
of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change 
as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these 
substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet 
at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
