 
  
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
*** Final Site*** Apirl 2016 
PCE FORMER DRY CLEANER  Atlantic, Iowa Cass County 
 
 
  
    Site Location: 
Atlantic, Iowa is a community in northeastern Cass County, about 75 miles west of Des Moines, Iowa and 45 miles northeast of Council Bluffs, Iowa. The site is located on 7th Street at the location of a former dry cleaning facility. 
 Site History: 
The site is a former dry cleaning facility that operated at this location during the 1960s. In 1974, the Iowa Department of Transportation (IDOT) leased the site as a materials testing laboratory. The former dry cleaning and IDOT laboratory facility no longer exist at this location. Based on the historical aerial photographs of the site, the building was razed between 1982 and 1994. The area is now occupied by a bank. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The ground water plume associated with the site is comprised of chlorinated solvents, including but not limited to: tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE) and degradation products. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The ground water plume extends to the municipal water supply system that consists of several down-gradient wells that are at risk of becoming contaminated. Nine active municipal wells serve the 7,475 citizens of Atlantic, Iowa. One municipal well has been taken off line due to contamination. Vapor intrusion impacts are under evaluation. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
The city of Atlantic has disconnected one municipal well from the municipal system; it is currently being pumped continuously to the city wastewater treatment plant to help protect the nine other municipal wells from PCE contamination. The owners of the business on the site have installed a vapor mitigation system. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Iowa initially referred the site to the EPA for evaluation under the Superfund Removal P rogram. The site requires short-term and long-term response actions and listing on the NPL will allow for a proper and timely investigation of the nature and extent of contamination and remediation of the site. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable options at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the city of Atlantic and the Atlantic Municipal Utilities. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxF AQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
 
