 
 
 
OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
*** Final Site*** May 2014  
PCE/TCE NORTHEAST CO NTAMINATION  York, Nebraska   
 York County  
 
 Site Location : 
The PCE/TCE Northeast Contamination site includes the northern portion of the city of York, Nebraska, which includes an 
industr ial and urban residential area, and a rural residential area just outside of the northern portion of the city limits. 
 
 Site History:  
The site is composed of documented releases of hazardous substances, mainly volatile organic compounds (VOCs),  into 
soils and ground  water.  One municipal water supply well has been contaminated and taken off line. The plume has also 
contaminated six private residential water supply wells, which has required provision of alternate water. The contamination 
appears to be coming from the Kroy/Alcan, Kroy Industries and Kroy Building Products facilities. However, there may be 
additional source areas. The site ground water plume extends approximately  2.5 miles.  
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
The ground water plume is comprised of chlorinated solvents, including but not limited to : tetrachloroethene (PCE), 
trichloroethene (TCE), 1,1,1-trichloroethene (1,1,1-TCA) 1,1-dichloroethylene (1,1-DCE) and 1,1,2 -trichloroethane (1,1,2-
TCA).   
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/E nvironment:  
The York Municipal Water Supply System serves a population of approximately 8, 080. The ground water plume extends 
approximately 2.5 miles. The new municipal public water supply well field is in danger of becoming contaminated because 
it is located less than 1/8 of a mile down-gradient of the ground water plume. Additionally, there are several private water 
supply wells in danger of becoming contaminated because they are also located down-gradient of the ground water plume.  
 
 Response Activitie s (to date):  
There is an ongoing removal action at the PCE/TCE Northeast Contamination site to provide alternate water to residences. 
To date, the EPA has provided alternate water to six residences at the request of the state of Nebraska.   
 
 Need for NPL Listing:  
The state of Nebraska referred the site to the EPA because the site requires short -term and long-term response actions and 
NPL listing will provide for investigation into the nature and extent of contamination and , if necessary, remediation of the 
site. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of 
support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change 
as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these 
substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet 
at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
