 
 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2005 
PEACH ORCHARD ROAD PCE
GROUND WATER PLUMEAugusta, Georgia 
Richmond County 12th Congressional District 
 
à Site Location/Size: 
The Peach Orchard Road PCE Ground Water Plume site is a tetrachloroethylene (PCE) ground water plume that has impacted one of the three Augusta Utilities Department (AUD) well fields located in the southern part of Augusta, Georgia. The PCE ground water plume covers an estimated 350 acres of the 900-acre well field. 
 
´ Site History: 
The ground water contamination was first detected in one of  the city’s wells in June 1996 during routine sampling of municipal well water. Since that time, PCE has been detected  in six additional municipal wells in the Peach Orchard Well Field and in numerous monitoring wells installed in the area. As  a result of the contamination, the city permanently closed the first well in October 1999 and designated five additional contaminated wells as standby wells in May 2001.  
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Between December 1999 and November 2000, the Georgia Envi ronmental Protection Division (GA EPD) conducted an investigation that revealed widespread PCE contamination. Tr ichloroethylene; cis-1,2-dichloroethylene; and vinyl chloride also were detected in several ground water samples. Sampli ng indicated that the PCE concentrations generally were increasing over time. GA EPD also conducted a preliminary evaluation and screening of the study area to identify possible sources of the PCE ground water plume. GA EPD identified 26 active and former facilities as  known or possible users of PCE, including dry cleaning facilities, gasoline service stations  with service bays, auto salvage yards, and automotive repair shops. GA EPD could not conclude from the investigation whether any other facilities contributed to the PCE contamination. To date, no available data conclusively iden tifies the source or sources of the PCE ground water plume. 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
AUD currently obtains potable water from a surface water intake and 30 ground water wells lo cated in three well fields, including the Peach Orchard Well Field. Water from all water sources are blended prior to final distribution. AUD provides potable water to 60,070 connections. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
To date, a private well survey has been conducted for an approximate 2-mile radius from the affected wells. In conjunction with the follow-up on the private well survey a nd a planned community involvement effort, a remedial investigation is planned to determine the extent of the ground water plume and to identify potential PCE contributors. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination.  See 56 FR 5600,  February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
 For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs.  ATSDR ToxFAQs can  be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
