 
   
 
  
 
   
   
    
 
  
   
   
  
 
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** November 2009 
PECK IRON AND METAL Portsmouth, Virginia 
Site Location: The former Peck Iron and Metal facility (Peck Iron) is located at 3850 Elm Avenue in Portsmouth, Virginia.   Site History: From 1945 to 1999, Peck Iron purchased, processed, stored, a nd shipped metal scrap from various military bases; other Federal, state, and local government agencies; and local businesses.  Scrap metal handled at the facility included damaged and obsolete equipment, attachments, parts, and other miscellaneous materials, including scrapped naval vessels. Some of these scrap materials contained cadmi um (automobile parts), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) (insulated wire, gaskets, fluorescent lights and transformer oils) and lead (scrapped bridge sections and automobile batteries). PCB-containing transformers were disassemble d at the facility and the wires were burned to remove insulation. Site Contamination/Contaminants: The primary contaminants are PCBs and lead.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: PCBs and lead have been detected in a wetland on the southwest border of facility and the bank of Paradise Creek.  Paradise Creek, a tidal estuary of the lower Chesapeake Bay, is a human food chain fishery and is used for recreation activities, including swimming, boating, crabbing and fishing.  Response Activities (to date): Between approximately 2004 and 2007, the current owner of th e facility conducted a study to determine the extent of the contamination on the facility and in the Paradise Creek wetland.   Need for NPL Listing: Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but were not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the Commonwealth of Virginia.     
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
