NPL Site Narrative for Peerless Plating Co.
 
PEERLESS PLATING CO.
Muskegon, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Peerless Plating Co. started operating an electroplating shop
on a 1-acre site at 2554 Getty Avenue in Muskegon, Muskegon County, Michigan, in 1937. The site is
surrounded by commercial, industrial, and residential areas. The plant closed in June 1983 as a result of
State and local enforcement actions, labor problems, and financial difficulties.
 
Operations at the plant involved toxic, corrosive, reactive, and flammable chemicals. According to the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources (MDNR), wastes containing heavy metals were discharged
into three unlined lagoons at the rear of the facility. MDNR also determined that manholes inside the plant
discharged directly onto the ground and that drummed wastes were stored on-site.
 
In September-October 1983, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds in a removal action at the site. EPA
removed 37,000 gallons of sulfuric acid, nitric acid, chromic acid, cyanide plating solution, chromium
plating solution, hydrochloric acid, and trichloroethylene. Also, the lagoons were drained; soil was removed
from the lagoon areas; the interior of the building was cleaned; vats, lines, and tanks were decontaminated;
sewer lines were sealed; and cyanides and nitric acid were neutralized on-site. Hazardous materials
were removed to a facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
Approximately 15,000-20,000 gallons of sludges and liquids remain on-site.
 
In 1985, EPA detected cadmium, chromium, cyanide, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, and trichloroethylene in
an on-site well. An estimated 1,500 people obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the
site. The nearest well is less than 100 feet from the site.
 
The site is on a nearly level lake plain. Little Black Creek, which empties into Lake Manor, is a major
drainage pathway. The lake is used for recreational activities.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In July 1989, EPA began planning a remedial investigation/feasibility study
to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
Field work is expected to start shortly.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
