NPL Site Narrative for Pemaco Maywood
 
PEMACO MAYWOOD
Maywood, California
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 28, 1998) : Pemaco Maywood is a four-acre facility that housed a chemical
blending facility operated by Pemaco, Inc. between the late 1940s and 1991. Hazardous chemicals stored
at the facility in underground and aboveground storage tanks and drums included chlorinated and aromatic
solvents, flammable liquids, petroleum hydrocarbons, and other volatile organic compounds. There were
31 underground storage tanks, six aboveground storage tanks, and more than 400 drums on site when the
facility was investigated by the Los Angeles County Fire Department in 1992.
 
During the Expanded Site Inspection (ESI) conducted in May 1997, several volatile organic compounds
were identified in near-surface and deep soil samples, as well as perched ground water and an underlying
regional aquifer. Floating product consisting of total petroleum hydrocarbons (gasoline) and 12 volatile
organic compounds was recovered from three wells drawing from the perched ground water. Aqueous
samples from 10 other wells in the perched ground water zone contained several chlorinated hydrocarbons
such as tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), 1,1,1-trichloroethane (TCA), 1,1- and 1,2-
dichloroethenes, 1,1-dichloroethane, and vinyl chloride.
 
EPA installed four monitoring wells into the shallow regional aquifer (80 to 100 feet deep) during the ESI in
May 1997. Ground water samples from three of the four wells contained TCE ranging from 410 to 11,000
micrograms per liter. Although the monitoring wells penetrate a shallow regional aquifer of the Lakewood
Formation, most of the drinking water wells within four miles of the site draw water from the San Pedro
Formation. Approximately 100 feet of clay separate the Lakewood from the San Pedro Formation within
two miles of the site.
 
Thirteen water purveyors draw ground water from 78 wells within four miles of the site to supply drinking
water to approximately 339,000 people. The nearest well to the site is 0.3 mile downgradient. The site
is located next to the Los Angeles River; however, the river is not used for drinking water. There are
no fisheries nor sensitive environments associated with the site. The site is in a mixed industrial and
residential community, with a residential tract across the street.
 
The Pemaco facility was a large quantity hazardous waste generator when it was in operation. Regulatory
involvement at the site has been limited to EPA, with some involvement from the Los Angeles County Fire
Department and the City of Maywood.
 
Status (January 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
