NPL Site Narrative for Pensacola Naval Air
Station
 
PENSACOLA NAVAL AIR STATION
Pensacola, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Pensacola Naval Air Station (NAS) covers approximately
6,500 acres on a peninsula in southern Escambia County, southwest of the City of Pensacola, Florida.
NAS is bounded on the north by Bayou Grande and on the east and south by Pensacola Bay. NAS has
been an industrial operations center since the early 1800s. Based at the station are various housing,
training, and support activities, as well as the Naval Air Rework Facility (NARF), a large industrial complex
for the repair and overhaul of aircraft engines and frames; the Naval Aviation Depot, which maintains and
rebuilds aircraft; and the Navy Public Works Center Pensacola, which provides overall operational support
for NAS. Other activities are essentially training commands. Outlying areas include landing fields, the
Naval Reservation, Corry Field, and Saufley Field.
 
NAS Pensacola is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under
this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. Under IRP, the Navy has identified 34 areas potentially containing hazardous waste.
Some are now inactive and are largely without records. Solid wastes have been disposed of primarily at
two landfill areas, one west of a golf course and the other north of Chevalier Field. Liquid wastes from
NARF operations were discharged to storm sewers until 1973, when an industrial sewer system and waste
water treatment plant were installed. Other activities involving hazardous substances include pesticide
application, transformer storage, and firefighting training. Spills or releases of plating wastes, organic
solvents, waste paints and thinners, PCBs, and insecticides have been documented.
 
Benzene and ethyl benzene are present in monitoring wells near the golf course, according to a 1986
IRP report. An estimated 15,000 people on NAS Pensacola and 30,000 customers of Peoples' Water Co.
obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of hazardous substances on NAS.
 
Surface water within 3 miles of hazardous substances on the site is used for recreational activities.
 
As part of IRP, the Navy plans to further investigate releases and contaminant migration under a permit
issued under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and incorporating corrective
action.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : EPA is reviewing a Navy workplan to fulfill requirements for a remedial
investigation under CERCLA and a facility investigation under RCRA.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
