NPL Site Narrative for Penta Wood
Products
 
PENTA WOOD PRODUCTS
Daniels, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 1995) : The Penta Wood Products (PWP) facility covers 88.5 acres
of a 122.5-acre property located on Highway 70 in the Town of Daniels, 2 miles west of the Village of
Siren in a rural area of Burnett County in northwest Wisconsin. PWP was a wood treating facility that
operated from 1953 to May 1992. The operations on site included pressure treating timbers and posts with
pentachlorophenol (PCP) in a fuel oil carrier, and Chemonite (ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate [ACZA]
and ammoniacal copper arsenate [ACA]). Hazardous wastewater from the site operations was discharged
to two lagoons and a woodchip pile. Numerous isolated spills and poor work practices released wood
treating chemicals to the soils and ground water at the site with little or no response action taken. On-site
soils are contaminated with PCP, arsenic, copper, and zinc. The highly contaminated areas are located
in and around the former treatment buildings. Due to the high permeability of surficial soils, precipitation
on site flows rapidly through the soil to the aquifer, allowing contaminants in the surface soils to be carried
rapidly to the ground water.
 
High levels of PCP and arsenic were detected in ground water and soils on site in 1988. Dioxins,
associated with PCP, are a lesser concern at the site and are still under investigation. High levels of PCP
in the ground water forced closure of the on-site wells for drinking purposes in 1988. The contaminated
aquifer is currently used for a private water supply for 1661 people and a municipal well supply for 1682
people within a 4-mile radius of the site. Ecological risk evaluations prepared by the Wisconsin Department
of Natural Resources (WDNR) and EPA Region 5 indicate the arsenic and PCP levels in the site soils and
woodchip pile pose a potential threat to animals on and adjacent to the site.
 
WDNR became involved at PWP in 1986 due to the unreported spills associated with the treatment
process. The PWP facility was closed in May 1992 due to the financial inability to comply with Wisconsin
Department of Justice requirements.
 
Due to the imminent and substantial threat to public health and welfare and the environment posed by the
large volumes and high concentrations of PCP, arsenic found in liquids and sludges in tanks and soils, and
trace dioxin contamination, a time-critical Removal Action Memorandum was drafted. EPA has completed
Phase I of the time-critical removal action, which included disposal of process wastes from tanks and
removal of highly contaminated soil. Phase II will address the remaining ACA/PCP soils and sludge and
complete the decontamination of tanks for disposal.
 
This site is part of an EPA nation-wide study on presumptive remedies for wood treating sites. EPA has
begun a two-phase study to determine the extent of contamination of the ground water and soils on site,
and conduct treatability studies investigating the potential for bioremediation technologies to treat the soils
on site.
 
Status (June 1996) : All drummed wastes have been removed from the site. EPA will initiate removing
process sludge, decontaminating tanks, and disposing of remaining wastes. EPA may also address PCP-
contaminated soils, demolish process buildings, and dispose of pressure-treatment vessels. Additional
ecological studies are planned.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
