NPL Site Narrative for Pepper Steel &
Alloys, Inc.
 
PEPPER STEEL & ALLOYS, INC.
Medley, Florida
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : Pepper Steel & Alloys, Inc., has processed scrap metals since
the early 1970s on a 10-acre site in Medley, Dade County, Florida. A portion of its business has been the
recycling of transformers and other electrical equipment. The company reportedly disposed of transformer
oil containing PCBs on the site and on two adjacent sites.
 
In 1975, a county inspector sampled an area of oil-soaked ground at Pepper Steel. Results showed high
levels of oil and grease. In December 1982, the county observed an oily layer up to 6 inches deep in six
pits, each 2 to 4 feet deep, on the site. Analyses of the oil revealed high concentrations of PCBs.
 
Early in 1983, EPA conducted a geophysical survey of the site and identified about a dozen zones
requiring further investigation. Soil sampling determined that PCBs were present in at least two zones.
Using approximately $250,000 in CERCLA emergency funds, EPA removed soil in "Zone A" and oil floating
on the shallow aquifer underlying the site. EPA also drilled observation wells and sampled on-site wells
and surface water in the immediate area. Florida Power and Light Co., which allegedly sent electrical
equipment to Pepper Steel for recycling, has agreed to perform further sampling and analysis outside of
"Zone A" and to recommend remedial alternatives.
 
Status (June 1984) : EPA is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and
extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
