NPL Site Narrative for Pesses Chemical
Co.
 
PESSES CHEMICAL CO.
Fort Worth, Texas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Pesses Chemical Co. Site is an abandoned facility in
Fort Worth, Tarrant County, Texas. The facility formerly recycled nickel-cadmium sludge, copper-cadmium
sludge, off-specification batteries, and spent batteries. Prior to processing, these batteries were stored on
the 4.6-acre site in 55-gallon containers and other containers. The residues from recycling were dumped
and spilled onto the ground. When the facility closed in 1981, 2,000 drums remained on the site. The
company, which also did business under the name "Metcoa," is in bankruptcy.
 
In March 1983, there was a fire at the site, and a fireman was hospitalized after inhaling toxic fumes.
In April 1983, using $338,000 in CERCLA emergency funds, EPA removed the drums, containers,
contaminated debris, and some contaminated soil from the site, and also put a temporary clay cap on the
site.
 
Analyses conducted by EPA indicate that there is extensive contamination of on-site soils with lead,
cadmium, and copper. Also, there is the potential for hazardous substances to leave the site via wind-
blown particles and surface run-off. A housing project and a playground are within 0.25 mile of the site.
Children often cross unsecured portions of the site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : A public meeting was held on February 26, 1985, to discuss a remedial
investigation/feasibility study, which will determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and
identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
