 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
*** Final Site*** September 2006 
 
PESTICIDE WAREHOUSE I Arecibo, Puerto Rico 
 
à Site Location: 
 Pesticide Warehouse I (PWI) is an active pesticide storag e warehouse located in a rural/industrial area of Arecibo, Puerto Rico.  PWI occupies approximately one acre and cons ists of a main warehouse, a smaller secondary warehouse in the rear of the property, and a small storage shed.  It is bounded to the south by State Road No. 2 and to the east, north, and  west by wooded areas.   
 
´ Site History: 
Historically, PWI was owned by the Puer to Rico Land Authority (PRLA).  PWI has been operating at this location since 1953 and supplies pesticides for pineapple crops in the surrounding area.  PWI is used for the storage and preparation of insecticides, herbicides, and fertilizers (hereafter collectivel y referred to as pesticides).  The site is still active and operations include mixing pesticides with water in tanker trucks.  Leftover and excess pesticides have been disposed on the ground adjacent to the main warehouse.  
 
In a March 1996 investigation, EPA observed numerous indica tions of poor housekeeping practices at PWI including: broken bags of pesticides and 25 drums in the main warehous e without secondary containment measures; pesticide bottles scattered throughout the property; a 20-foot by 20-foot excavati on in the northwest corner of the property that contained empty pesticide bottles, Malathion labels, and bags of Vydate , Gramoxone and magnesium sulfate; visible pesticide residue at several locations throughout the property;  and a white residue along what appeared to be the surface runoff pathway that began at the mixing platform in front of the main warehouse.  The white residue was visible for approximately 100 feet to the fence line where it entered a culvert.  The residue was obs erved to continue from the culvert approximately 1,500 feet along a drainage ditch paralleling State Road No. 2, passing the property well and entering a vegetated area. 
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Surface soil samples indicated the presence of several pes ticides, including aldrin, endrin, endrin aldehyde, gamma- chlordane, toxaphene, diazinon, and diuron.  Analyses of th e ground water samples from the property well indicated the presence of heptachlor epoxide, dieldrin, 4,4′-DDE, and endrin. 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Historical and present operations at PWI have resu lted in soil and ground water contamination. Ground water contamination in the area potentially threatens public supply wells  within 4 miles of PWI.  The Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer Authority indicates that approximately 48,600 people are se rved by public supply wells within 4 miles of PWI.  Soil contamination in the area also poses a potential threat to workers at PWI. 
 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
In May 1996, EPA sampled the property as part of a Site Inspection.  In December 2001, EPA conducted a follow up reconnaissance investigation. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
