NPL Site Narrative for Peterson/Puritan,
Inc.
 
PETERSON/PURITAN, INC.
Cumberland, Lincoln, Rhode Island
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The Peterson-Puritan, Inc., Site covers 920 acres in the well
fields of Lincoln and Cumberland, Rhode Island. Organic contamination was first detected in October 1979
in three Lincoln wells on the west bank of the Blackstone River and in a Cumberland well on the east bank
of the river. These wells were closed and remain out of service. Although Lincoln received Federal funds
for an alternate water supply, the town made several attempts from October 1979 through June 1980 to
flush contaminants from its wells by pumping them. However, long-term pumping increased contaminant
levels.
 
In March 1982, EPA completed a study of an area 2 miles in length along the Blackstone River, extending
2,000 feet east and west of the main channel. The northeastern corner of the site, on the Cumberland side
of the river, is occupied by a small industrial area that includes Peterson-Puritan. The study concluded
that Peterson-Puritan was the most probable source of contamination of the Lincoln wells and that the
Cumberland well was contaminated by some of the same compounds found in the Lincoln wells.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA has met with Peterson-Puritan and its parent company, CPU International, Inc.
Peterson-Puritan conducted an initial study to determine the source or sources of contaminants leaving
its property. EPA received the report in late June 1983, at which time EPA started to negotiate a Consent
Decree with Peterson-Puritan for remedial action at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
