NPL Site Narrative for Petroleum Products
Corp.
 
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS CORP.
Pembroke Park, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : Petroleum Products Corp. refined, stored, and recycled oil on
a 2-acre site in Pembroke Park, Broward County, Florida, from about 1952 to 1972. Poor housekeeping
and equipment maintenance resulted in soils becoming heavily impregnated with oil and the formation of a
layer of organic chemicals on the shallow Biscayne Aquifer beneath the site. The aquifer is contaminated
with lead and PCBs, according to Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (DER) analyses of
monitoring wells. Pits covering an extensive area on the site contain sludges generated in the oil recycling
process. Although the area was filled and paved over in 1970-74, it continues to discharge oily materials,
especially during the rainy season.
 
The City of Hallandale well field is less than 0.5 mile downgradient from the site; two other municipal well
fields are located within 3 miles. More than 150,000 people obtain their drinking water from these wells.
 
DER filed suit against Petroleum Products in June 1984 in Broward County Circuit Court to force the
company to clean up the site or to allow the State to use its own funds and then to assess penalties for
cost recovery.
 
After EPA issued a CERCLA Section 106 order for an immediate removal action at the site, EPA and
Petroleum Products entered into a Consent Order on April 1, 1985. The order required the company to
perform tasks outlined in an Immediate Removal Work Plan, which is incorporated as part of the Consent
Order.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Petroleum Products removed the drums, storage tanks, and contaminated sludge
and transported the materials to an EPA-regulated disposal site.
 
In May 1986, DER began a State-financed remedial investigation involving the contaminated ground water,
soil, and sludges. The investigation is nearing completion; all field work has been finished.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
