NPL Site Narrative for Pfohl Brothers
Landfill
 
PFOHL BROTHERS LANDFILL
Cheektowaga, New York
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (May 10, 1993) : Pfohl Brothers Landfill, a privately owned and operated
landfill, deposited municipal and industrial wastes between 1932 and 1971 at a 166.5-acre property
in Cheektowaga, Erie County, New York. The northern section of the landfill has been graded and is
now occupied by a trucking firm. The area is residential and commercial. Buffalo International Airport is
approximately 0.5 mile west of the site.
 
Chemical wastes in liquid, solid, and sludge form were either buried at the site in drums or placed into
cells excavated in the ground. The wastes deposited included cyanides and plating sludge, waste paint
and paint sludge, lithographic inks, pigments, organic solvents, liquid and solid PCB-contaminated
wastes, sludge from distillation processes, petroleum wastes, and 100 to 125 tons of phenol tar containing
chlorinated benzenes and dioxins.
 
Since 1980, the Erie County Health Department, EPA, the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYSDEC), and the owner have investigated the site. A remedial investigation was
conducted in 1988-89 by NYSDEC.
 
The investigations indicated that surface water both on and off the site is contaminated by organic
chemicals, including benzene, phenol, chlorobenzene, and dichlorobenzene. Nearby surface water
consists of Ellicott Creek, an adjacent ditch that leads into the creek, and Aero Lake, which lies just north
of the ditch. The lake and creek are used for recreational fishing. A wetland formerly existed in what is now
the central section of the property. Other wetlands border the creek and ditch.
 
On-site and off-site soil is contaminated with PCBs, barium, manganese, and mercury, according to the
remedial investigation. Most of the site is fenced, but drainage ditches contaminated with leachate from the
landfill lie outside the fencing and are accessible to the public. Ten homes are within 200 feet of an area of
contaminated soil.
 
Status (December 1994) : Currently, the potentially responsible parties (PRPs) are preparing the design
for the landfill cap, even though a Consent Order has not been officially signed with DEC. EPA will be
reviewing all design documents. Additionally, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
(ATSDR) has announced that it will be collecting attic dust samples from homes adjacent to the landfill,
as well as some further away to be used for control purposes. ATSDR is currently preparing the sampling
protocol, which will be reviewed by EPA and DEC. The sampling is expected to take place in early 1995.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
