NPL Site Narrative for Picayune Wood
Treating
 
PICAYUNE WOOD TREATING
Picayune, Mississippi
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (March 8, 2004) : The Picayune Wood Treating (Picayune) facility is located at
403 Davis Street in Picayune, Pearl River County, Mississippi. Picayune encompasses approximately
29.1 acres. Source areas evaluated at Picayune include an unknown quantity of contaminated soil located
throughout the facility, three backfilled surface impoundments on the western portion of the property, and
a backfilled former cooling pond in the northern portion of the property. The three surface impoundments
on the western portion of the facility property comprise a total area of about 27,000 square feet. The former
cooling pond is approximately 5,000 square feet. The surface impoundments are not lined.
 
The Picayune facility is bounded on the north by a residential, commercial, and industrial area; on the east
by a commercial and industrial area; on the south by an abandoned lumber yard, a public park, a daycare
center, and residences; and on the west by Southside Elementary School and residences.
 
Analytical results for on-site surface and subsurface soil samples have indicated the presence of
inorganic and organic contaminants including arsenic, chromium, copper, lead, cyanide, benzene,
methylisobutylketone, toluene, ethylbenzene, total xylenes, styrene, several polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH), and phenols. In addition, several dioxin and furan compounds were identified at
elevated concentrations in surface soil, subsurface soil, and sediment samples collected from Picayune.
 
Ground water contamination is a significant concern at Picayune. Copper and lead are attributable
inorganic constituents of concern detected at elevated levels in ground water samples collected from on-
site monitoring wells. Site-related organic compounds detected at elevated concentrations in samples
collected from on-site monitoring wells include benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene, total xylenes, styrene,
isopropyl benzene, and numerous PAHs. An estimated 15,160 persons obtain potable water from wells
within a 4-mile radius of Picayune. The nearest drinking water wells are operated by the City of Picayune,
within 0.25 miles northeast of Picayune.
 
Surface water contamination is also a major concern at Picayune. Inorganic contaminants detected at
elevated concentrations in sediment samples collected at and downstream of Picayune include arsenic,
chromium, copper, lead, and cyanide. Hazardous substances detected at elevated concentrations
in sediment samples collected at and downstream of the facility include lead, cyanide, toluene, ethyl
benzene, total xylenes, isopropyl benzene, numerous PAHs, and dioxin and furan compounds.
 
Mill Creek was used for recreational purposes by children in the adjacent public park; however, it has
been partially fenced and access is restricted. Mill Creek flows into the Pearl River, which is also used
for recreational purposes including fishing and boating. Approximately eight miles of palustrine forested
wetlands are located along Mill Creek, downstream of Picayune. Additionally, freshwater wetlands are
located on Mill Creek, downstream of Picayune.
 
Status (July 2004) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
