NPL Site Narrative for Picatinny Arsenal
(USARMY)
 
PICATINNY ARSENAL (USARMY)
Rockaway Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : Picatinny Arsenal covers 6,491 acres in Morris County, New
Jersey. Most of the land is in Rockaway Township; small portions of the western side are in Jefferson
Township. Interstate 80 is about 1 mile southeast of the main entrance. The surrounding areas are
suburban as well as summer vacation areas.
 
In operation for over 100 years, the arsenal has been a major source of munitions in wartime throughout
much of this century. Currently, its primary mission is research, development, and pilot plant production of
explosives and propellants for the Army.
 
Picatinny Arsenal is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under
this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. IRP studies have established that many areas on the arsenal are contaminated by
manufacturing waste and unexploded ordnance. At least 54 potential hazardous waste areas exist on the
base, according to a 1987 report of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. They include
areas for testing rocket fuels, munitions, and propellants; areas where chemicals and shells were buried;
surface impoundments; landfills; drum storage areas; and a sludge bed.
 
Monitoring wells and soils adjacent to unlined lagoons, which, until 1981, held waste water from metal
plating and etching facilities, are contaminated with trichloroethylene, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, 1,1,1-
trichloroethane, and tetrachloroethylene, according to tests reported to EPA in 1986. Some of these same
wells have elevated concentrations of cadmium, lead, and copper. The arsenal's 5,500 employees obtain
their drinking water from two wells upgradient from an area of confirmed ground water contamination.
 
Lake Denmark and Picatinny Lake, which are on the base, are used for recreational activities.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : In 1990, the Army is scheduled to begin cleaning up the contaminated ground
water around the metal plating operations and submit to EPA a plan for cleanup of the entire arsenal. The
plan will assign priorities for cleaning up the many contaminated areas.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
