 
 
 
OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site***                                                                                                                                       S epte mb er 2014  
                        PIERSON’S CREEK    Newark, N ew Jers ey 
                Essex County 
 
Site Location:  
The Pierson’s Creek  site is located in an  industrial area of New ark, New J ersey.  Pi erson ’s Creek  disch arges to 
New ark Bay,  appr oximately 1.5  miles down stream. 
 
Site History: 
An active chemical facility that currently manufactures antimicrobial and antifungal paint additives and related 
products is located just upstream of Pierson’s Creek. Prior to the facility’s chemical manufacturing operation, which 
began in 1956, the facility had been occupied by other industrial operators since the late 1800s. In addition, there had 
been other industries along Pierson’s Creek, which may have affected the sediments in Pierson’s Creek. Mercury 
compounds were manufactured at the facility from 1957 until 1987. From 1965 to 1976, the mercury wastewater was 
treated on-site with sulfide precipitation prior to discharge to the creek. In 1976, an on-site wastewater treatment plant 
was installed that discharges to the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission Waste Water Treatment Plant. 
 
In addition to the discharge of mercury-contaminated wastewater, there is a history of spills and discharges to the 
ground surface characterized by puddles of chemicals on the ground; mercury droplets on the ground and in runoff 
reaching Pierson’s Creek.  
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants:  
The primary contaminant of concern is mercury, which was discharged directly to Pierson’s Creek. In addition to 
mercury, creek sediments contain elevated levels of arsenic, cadmium, chromium, lead, nickel, volatile organic 
compounds (VOCs), pesticides, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs ) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Conta mination is affecting the we tlands a long Pi erson ’s Creek. Newark Bay is p art of the New York-New J ersey 
(NY -NJ) Harbor Estuary, a sensitive area identified  und er the National Estuary Progra m. Despite advisories and 
restr
ictions, people in the area continue to eat fish caught in the NY -NJ Harbor Estuary,  including Newark Bay. The 
hist
orical and on-going me rcury conta min ation is likely at least p artially a ttributable to sediment discharges fr om 
Pierson ’s Creek. 
 
 Respon se Activities (to date):  
The site has b een the focus of num erous investigations since the 1970s, but int erim remedia l actions to da te have not 
addressed mercury conta min ation downstrea m. 
 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of 
support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of New Jersey. 
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may 
change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent 
FR notices.]  
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to 
these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on 
the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42 -ATSDR or 1-888 -422-8737.  
