OLEM/OSRTIWashington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** September  2021 
PIONEER METAL FINISHING INC  Franklinville, New Jersey 
Gloucester County  
Site Location:
The Pioneer Metal Finishing Inc (Pioneer) site is a former electroplating facility located at 2034 Coles Mill Road, Franklinville, Gloucester County, New Jersey. The site is situated in southwestern New Jersey, within the Atlantic Coastal Plain.  
 Site History: 
Pioneer began operation as an electroplating facility in 1955 and discharged untreated waste from the facility from that time until the mid- to late-1970s. Wastes reportedly consisted of metallic salts, untreated process sludge, rinse water, cleaning solutions, and plating wastes that were discharged into an unlined trench leading to an adjacent wetland southeast of the plant. From the mid- to late-1970s to 1981, facility effluent was treated prior to discharge. In 1981, a closed loop system was installed and discharge of wastewater ceased. Only non- contact cooling water has been discharged since 1981 under a New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) Permit. Electroplating activities ceased around 2005 and the facility is currently used for powder coating operations.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Sampling by the EPA and Pioneer indicates that soil adjacent to the Pioneer facility and sediment within the adjacent wetland are contaminated with chromium, copper, and nickel at levels above human health- based screening levels and/or ecological risk levels. Soil is also contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Pioneer facility soils and the adjacent wetland are contaminated with chromium, copper, and nickel. There are two employees that are exposed to contaminated soil at the facility. The wetland is contiguous with Scotland Run, which runs through additional wetlands that are potentially contaminated by releases from the site. The contamination threatens Timothy Lake, which is approximately 1 mile downstream of the site and is utilized for swimming, boating, and fishing. Additional downstream recreational water bodies and sensitive environments that may be threatened by the releases from the site include Malaga Lake, Willow Grove Lake, U nion Lake Wildlife Management Area (WMA), and eight state - listed threatened or endangered species habitats. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
In July 2018, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) asked the EPA for help addressing contamination at the site. In response, the EPA documented conditions at the site and collected samples from select containers for field characterization testing. Field characterization indicated that flammables, acids, and corrosive materials were present within the facility. From August 2018 to August 2019, the EPA removed over 100 tons of hazardous waste and cyanide-contaminated debris from the facility, which included approximately 20,000 gallons of liquid waste. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of  New J ersey referred t he site to t he EPA be cause soil and  sediment  cont aminated w ith m etals r equir e cleanup  
to protect human health and the environment. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable 
at this time. The EPA received  a letter of support for placing the site on t he NPL f rom the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description 
may change as additional info
rmation is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or 
subsequent FR notices.] 
For more 
information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure 
to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be 
found on 
the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-8 00-C DC-I NFO or 1 -800-2 32 -4636.
