NPL Site Narrative for Piper Aircraft Corp./
Vero Beach Water & Sewer Department
 
PIPER AIRCRAFT CORP./VERO BEACH WATER & SEWER
DEPARTMENT
Vero Beach, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Piper Aircraft Corp./Vero Beach Water & Sewer
Department Site covers 8 acres in Vero Beach, Indian River County, Florida. Piper assembles and paints
light aircraft at the southern end of the Vero Beach Municipal Airport. In 1980, an unknown amount of
trichloroethylene leaked from an underground storage tank and distribution system, contaminating a
nearby municipal well of the Vero Beach Water & Sewer Department with volatile organic compounds
(VOCs). The well, which was subsequently shut down, was part of a municipal system serving about
33,000 people. Six months later the city developed two other wells to replace the closed one.
 
In 1981, the State entered into a Consent Agreement with Piper requiring the company to conduct a
monitoring, testing, and treatment program at the site. Piper repaired the leaking storage tank and in April
1981 began to pump out the contaminated ground water. To date, the pumping has yielded approximately
2,050 gallons of VOCs, including trichloroethylene, cis- and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, vinyl chloride, and
1,1-dichloroethylene. The contaminated water is sprayed into the air to enhance removal of VOCs and is
discharged into the Main Canal leading to the Indian River.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : The city is continuing to submit quarterly reports on the monitoring of the
treated effluent being discharged to the Indian River.
 
According to the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation, Piper's ground water pumping and
treatment program has not achieved cleanup goals. The program will be reevaluated and additional
remedial investigation activities will be undertaken.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
