NPL Site Narrative for Plattsburgh Air
Force Base
 
PLATTSBURGH AIR FORCE BASE
Plattsburgh, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : The Plattsburgh Air Force Base (PAFB) covers 3,440 acres
in Clinton County, New York. The base is bordered on the north by the Saranac River and the City of
Plattsburgh. Lake Champlain is to the east and the Salmon River borders the base on the south. The
base was activated in 1955 to serve as a tactical wing in the Strategic Air Command. Ever since, the base
has generated hazardous and potentially hazardous wastes by industrial shop operations, maintenance
of aircraft, painting, fire fighting exercises, discharging of munitions, and spills. Contaminants generated
include PCBs, methyl ethyl ketone (MEK), trichloroethylene (TCE), dichlorobenzene, methylene chloride,
and other organic solvents. Hazardous wastes were deposited in unlined landfills and burned in unlined
pits.
 
Toluene, TCE, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, methylene chloride, and 1,2-dichloroethane are present in ditches
draining areas where solvents and jet fuels were spilled. Tests conducted in 1987 found MEK, TCE,
and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene in two shallow monitoring wells downgradient of a drum storage area. An
estimated 2,000 people obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of a base landfill.
 
The Air Force is conducting field investigations which include sampling of soil, ground water, and surface
water at several areas cited during a 1985 records search of hazardous waste and spill areas.
 
PAFB is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials.
 
Status (November 21, 1989) : IRP activities continue.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
