NPL Site Narrative for Pohatcong Valley
Ground Water Contamination
 
POHATCONG VALLEY GROUND WATER CONTAMINATION
Warren County, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Pohatcong Valley Ground Water Contamination Site in
Warren County, New Jersey, involves the contamination of the "Kittatinny" Limestone Aquifer underlying
Pohatcong Valley. The aquifer serves as the sole source of drinking water for public and private wells in
the area. The site includes those portions of Franklin Township, Washington Township, and Washington
Boro lying in the valley and encompasses approximately 3,500 acres, extending from the southwest side of
Broadway-Asbury Road northeast to Route 31. Population density varies from sparse in the farmlands of
Franklin Township to dense in Washington Boro.
 
Analyses of two public supply wells in 1978 and 1979 revealed high levels of tetrachloroethylene and
trichloroethylene, prompting the closing of one well and the installation of a carbon filtration system at the
other. In 1984 and 1985, the Warren County Health Department identified a number of volatile organic
chemicals, primarily trichloroethylene, in 79 private wells throughout the valley. In cases where permissible
levels for drinking water have been exceeded, Warren County is supplying bottled water. Plans are
underway to establish a municipal water supply throughout the area of contaminated wells. An estimated
11,000 people obtain drinking water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection has performed an extensive investigation to
determine the source of contamination and has identified several likely sources.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is preparing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
