NPL Site Narrative for Pomona Oaks
Residential Wells
 
POMONA OAKS RESIDENTIAL WELLS
Galloway Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Pomona Oaks Residential Wells serve approximately
200 single-family homes in a rural residential area of Galloway Township, Atlantic County, New Jersey.
The lots range from 0.25 to 0.5 acre in size. The wells average 50 to 60 feet deep.
 
The State's analyses of the wells and of air in showers at several homes detected the following volatile
organic chemicals: benzene, 1,2-dichloroethane, methylene chloride, and 1,1,2-trichloroethane.
Approximately 8,000 people living within 3 miles of the site could be affected by the contaminated ground
water. The State advised residents to seek alternate sources of drinking water. Furthermore, the State
strongly suggested that some residents cease using their well water for bathing purposes. Since there
are no municipal wells in the area, affected residents have resorted to carting water from various other
sources.
 
The State is monitoring the impact of volatile organics inside the homes and has contracted for a study
to fully evaluate and recommend alternate water supplies. The Atlantic County Department of Health is
continuing its investigations to determine the source of contamination.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA sampled 67 homes, some of which
showed low levels of volatile organic chemicals. EPA then began to distribute bottled water to the affected
homes. The local water supplier, New Jersey Water Co., extended water lines, and the distribution system
was installed to serve the affected homes. This system is reported to be incapable of meeting peak water
supply demands. Galloway Township is continuing efforts to secure the land for siting a new production
well. EPA has terminated the distribution of bottled water.
 
The State is preparing a cooperative agreement application to EPA for a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of ground water contamination and identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
