NPL Site Narrative for Pools Prairie
 
POOLS PRAIRIE
Neosho, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (January 19, 1999) : The Pools Prairie site (formerly referred to as the Neosho
Wells site) is adjacent to Neosho, Newton County, Missouri, in southwest Missouri. The site was
discovered in July 1994 by the Newton County Health Department (NCHD) through a citizen's complaint of
gasoline contamination in the family's well located west of Highway 71 on Quince Road, southwest of the
Neosho city limits. The citizen suspected gasoline contamination was coming from a truck plaza located
immediately north of the citizen's house. In August 1994, subsequent sampling by NCHD and the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources (MDNR) at the truck plaza, the family's well, and at other nearby
residential wells determined that there were no leaking tanks at the truck plaza; however, eight volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), including trichloroethylene (TCE) and carbon tetrachloride were found in the
10 private wells sampled. The most common VOC found in the wells and at the highest concentration was
TCE. From August to December 1994, MDNR and NCHD continued to sample and resample residential
wells in the area of Highway 71 and Quince Road. Additional residential wells were found to contain TCE,
with some concentrations found above the TCE maximum contaminant level (MCL) of 5 parts per billion
(ppb) in the area located along roads HH and TT and near the intersection of Highways 71 and 60.
 
Since November 1994, over 200 residential wells, community wells, city water supplies, and commercial
business wells have been sampled by EPA, MDNR, or NCHD. Approximately 36 residential wells exhibited
TCE or carbon tetrachloride at levels at or above the maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) of 5 ppb.
TCE concentrations in monitoring wells on site ranged from 0.5 - 200,000 ppb, and TCE concentrations
in residential wells ranged from 5.4 - 210 ppb. Carbon tetrachloride concentrations in monitoring wells
and residential wells ranged from 0.7 - 14 ppb. In addition, approximately 35 residential wells and one
community well (serving approximately 52 residents) exhibited TCE at levels less than 5 ppb.
 
EPA and the State have conducted several investigations on site to collect ground water and soil samples
and to identify potential sources of the contaminants detected in private drinking water wells. Five source
areas have been identified at the Pools Prairie site for which adequate documentation exists to attribute
the VOCs found in ground water to the site. To identify the sources of VOC ground water contamination,
EPA and MDNR first investigated the area south of Neosho, known as the Crowder Industrial Park, and
later investigated the area known as the former Fort Crowder Military Reservation (Camp Crowder). The
five sources identified are: Source 1 - Engine Testing Area (ETA) at the Rocketdyne test site; Source 2 -
Components Testing Area (CTA) at the Rocketdyne test site; Source 3 - Contaminated soil at the CTA;
Source 4 - Sabreliner Plant (Main Facility); and Source 5 - Sabreliner 900 Building.
 
Two aquifers are present in the Neosho area which are separated by a confining layer of shale: a shallow
aquifer (consisting of residuum and limestone bedrock) that has been documented as a karst aquifer, and
a deep aquifer (consisting of limestones, dolomites, and sandstone) that is not karst. Both of the aquifers
are used for drinking water purposes by residences outside of the Neosho city limits, but contamination
has only been documented in the shallow aquifer. Only the shallow aquifer has been evaluated in the
Documentation Record because there is insufficient evidence to document that the two aquifers are
interconnected. More than 2,000 people are served by drinking water from this aquifer in the general area
of the site.
 
To date, potentially responsible parties (PRPs) have performed removal work under several enforcement
agreements, such as installation of whole house treatment units for approximately 40 homes, containment
at lagoons at the Components Testing Area, and construction of more than 5 miles of water main to
connect approximately 230 homes to the city of Neosho water supply (25% complete).
 
The listing process itself is not intended to define or reflect the boundaries of facilities or releases. For
clarification, at the time of listing the site boundaries for the Pools Prairie site include those areas to which
the ground water contamination plume has migrated and known surface sources as described herein. It
does not include surface and unsaturated subsurface soils unless those soils are also contaminated.
 
Status (September 1999) : A soil removal and ground water containment is planned at the Quince Road
area. The National Guard Bureau began a removal at the Engine Testing Area in early summer of 1999.
This consists of removing liquid wastes from the pit that were present at the time the pit was backfilled.
The liquid waste in the waste pit contains TCE, DCE, and vinyl chloride at levels up to 250,000,000 ppb.
Approximately 8,200 gallons have been pumped to date.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
