NPL Site Narrative for Popile, Inc.
 
POPILE, INC.
El Dorado, Arkansas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 7, 1992) : The Popile, Inc., site is on the east side of Southfield Road,
approximately 1/4 mile south of where it intersects U.S. Highway 82 just south of El Dorado, Union County,
Arkansas. The property is bordered by the CRI&P Railroad on the east and Bayou de Loutre, a perennial
creek, on the north. Located upgradient and south of the site is a woodland area.
 
In 1947, El Dorado Creosote Co., the parent company of Popile, Inc., began treating wood at the 40-acre
property using pentachlorophenol (PCP) and creosote. El Dorado Pole & Piling Co., Inc., purchased the
property in 1958. Starting in 1976, three surface impoundments were used as part of the waste water
treatment process. Wood-treatment operations stopped in July 1982. In September 1982, Popile bought
approximately 7.5 acres of the property, including the surface impoundments and a large open area known
as the salt flat. In October 1984, Popile closed the three impoundments as one unit.
 
From September 1990 to May 1991, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to deal with the leaking closed
impoundment and the release of contaminants from the wood treatment facility, a nearby impoundment
that collects surface water drainage from the treatment area, and a large open area known as the Salt Flat.
EPA removed waste material from the four areas and buried it just south of the impoundment.
 
EPA analyses conducted in October 1989 detected PCP, acenaphthene, naphthalene, benz(a)anthracene,
benzo(a)pyrene, fluorene, pyrene, and other chemicals associated with wood treatment in on-site soil.
Shallow on-site monitoring wells may be similarly contaminated.
 
Sediments collected off-site, where site drainage enters Bayou de Loutre, contained the same
contaminants found on-site. The bayou is considered a fishery. Wetlands begin 1 mile downstream and
extend for more than 14 stream miles downstream.
 
Shallow ground water (0 to 45 feet below the surface) is used primarily for commercial livestock watering.
The City of El Dorado obtains its drinking water from wells drawing from the El Dorado Aquifer (700 to
1,000 feet below the surface). An estimated 26,300 people obtain drinking water from public and private
wells into this aquifer within 4 miles of the site. The nearest well is a private well 0.75 mile from the site.
 
Status (October 1992) : In July 1992, EPA completed a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
The proposed alternative, issued in July for public comment, called for extraction and treatment of the
ground water and capping of the moderately contaminated soils. Based on State and public comments,
EPA provided a second comment period to reconsider the various treatment options, which included on-
site incineration and biological treatment of the contaminated soils. Neither alternative was opposed at the
public meeting conducted on September 17, 1992. EPA is currently developing the Record of Decision
documenting the alternative selected.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
