NPL Site Narrative for Portsmouth Naval
Shipyard
 
PORTSMOUTH NAVAL SHIPYARD
Kittery, Maine
 
 
Portsmouth Naval Shipyard (PNS) is located on Seavey Island in the Piscataqua River in Kittery, York
County, Maine. The 278-acre Seavey Island is composed of three smaller islands (formerly Seavey,
Jamaica, and Dennett's Islands) connected by 90 acres of fill. Filling of the tidal flats between the original
islands took place gradually as space needs for PNS increased. The PNS property also includes the
undeveloped Clark's Island, which is connected by a bridge to Seavey Island.
 
PNS, established in 1690, became a Navy shipyard in 1800. During its operational history, the shipyard
was used for construction of ships and submarines and is currently used to overhaul nuclear propulsion
fleet ballistic missile submarines and attack submarines. PNS consists of three dry docks, 6,500 linear
feet of berthing, and 376 buildings and other structures. Hazardous wastes have been stored, disposed of,
spilled, and/or treated at more than 30 areas on the site.
 
From 1945 to 1975, untreated acidic and alkaline wastes, waste battery acid and lead sludge, waste water
and spent baths from an electroplating operation, and other wastes from various industrial shops were
discharged into the Piscataqua River via industrial waste outfalls. From 1945 until approximately 1978,
25 acres of tidal flats between Jamaica and Seavey Islands were filled with wastes including chromium-,
lead-, and cadmium-plating sludge; asbestos insulation; trichloroethylene; methylene chloride; toluene;
methyl ethyl ketone; drums of waste paint and solvents; mercury-contaminated materials; sandblasting grit
containing various metal wastes; and dredged sediments from the Piscataqua River.
 
Dredged sediment samples collected in the late 1970s near the industrial outfalls were found to contain
elevated concentrations of metals, PCBs, and other contaminants. Although Portsmouth Harbor and the
lower Piscataqua River are heavily industrialized, the Navy has indicated that the probable source of the
sediment contamination is the industrial outfalls at PNS. In addition, hazardous substances attributable to
PNS are present at elevated levels in wetlands bordering Seavey Island.
 
Ground water supplies drinking water to over 10,000 people within 4 miles of the site. Salmon Falls,
the Cocheco and Piscataqua Rivers, the Great Bay estuary, and coastal tidal waters within 15 miles
downstream of PNS are used for commercial and recreational fishing. In addition, extensive wetlands
communities exist along surface water bodies downstream of the PNS site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
