NPL Site Narrative for Port Hadlock
Detachment (USNAVY)
 
PORT HADLOCK DETACHMENT (USNAVY)
Indian Island, Washington
 
 
Port Hadlock Detachment of the U.S.Navy, is located on Indian Island in Jefferson County southeast of the
city of Port Townsend, Washington. The 2,700-acre island is approximately 4.5 miles long and 0.5 miles
wide.
 
The island was purchased by the Navy in 1948 to store explosives. Currently, the island receives, stores,
maintains, and issues Naval ordnance; assembles anti-submarine rocket airframes; and provides mine
maintenance.
 
Sources of hazardous waste activity at the site include municipal and industrial landfills, drum and
container storage areas, above and below ground storage tanks, burn pits, spills, and possible areas of
illegal dumping. Potentially hazardous wastes associated with the sources at the site include heavy metals,
pesticides, PCBs, solvents, explosives, paints and pigments, and acids and bases.
 
Site investigations conducted by the Navy in 1989 documented marine sediments contaminated with heavy
metals, PCBs, and other organic compounds. Shellfish have also been found contaminated with heavy
metals and pesticides.
 
Commercial and recreational harvesting of shellfish occurs on the beaches at the north and south ends
of the island, at Bishop's Point on the east side of the island, as well as in coastal waters surrounding
the island. The beach at the north end has been posted as closed for the collection of shellfish. Although
most of the island is restricted, civilians occasionally enter along beaches by boat to collect clams. Native
Americans also are permitted access for collecting shellfish. Fort Flagler State Park is located a few
hundred feet from the north end of the island.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
