   
   
      
           
    
  
  
      
         
           
          
             
      
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** July 2017  
POST AND LUMBER PRESERVING Quincy, Florida 
Gadsden County CO. INC. 
Site Location:
The Post and Lumber Preserving Co. Inc. site is an 18-a cre property located at the northeast corner of Post Plant Road 
and Havana Highway in Quincy, Florida. The site is in a rural setting with several residences near the facility. 
 Site History: 
Between 1948 and 1990, wood preserving operations were conducted at the facility using both pentachlorophenol (PCP) and chromated copper arsenate (CCA). An on -site pond was used for the collection of waste materials and was later converted to an on-site surface impoundment. The site drains into an unnamed tributary of the Little River. The facility is now abandoned. The site is partially fenced but is not secured. Site Contamination/Contaminants: Soil, sediment and ground water are contaminated with pentachlorophenol (PCP), arsenic and dioxin. Dioxins, furans and arsenic have been found in levels above Save Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) in ground water migrating from the surface impoundment. Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : Dioxin and arsenic contamination have been found in the wetlands surrounding the site and in the creek leading from the site to the Little River. The Little River is classified as a recreational river by the state of Florida. In addition, th e site’s surface impoundment contains high levels of wood preserving -related wastes and is likely a source of ground water contamination. Response Activities (to date): In 1987 the waste materials from the on -site pond were consolidated into the current surface impoundment, and capped. In 1996, the EPA conducted a time -critical removal action to address contaminated on -site surface soils and remove remaining tanks and drums. Lastly, since 1996 the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FLDEP) has removed additional soils both on- site and off-site, including soils at several nearby residential properties. In addition, FLDEP placed a temporary cover over the surface impoundment. Need for NPL Listing: The state of Florida referred the site to the EPA because of the contamination in the shallow ground water at the si te and the need to investigate the extent of the contamination in off -site wetlands and downstream sediments. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter in support of proposing to add this site to the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may 
c
hange as ad
ditional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subse quen t 
FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure 
to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found 
on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp o r by telephone at 1 -800-C DC-I NFO or 1-8 00 -232-4 636. 
