NPL Site Narrative for Precision Plating
Corp.
 
PRECISION PLATING CORP.
Vernon, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Precision Plating Corp. has chrome-plated various metal parts
and fixtures on a 3-acre site in Vernon, Tolland County, Connecticut, since 1970. The process includes
alkaline cleaning, chemical etching, chrome plating, rinsing, buffing, and polishing. Wastes generated
during this process include rinse waters containing heavy metals, batch wastes of alkaline cleaner, and
spent plating and etching acids. Prior to 1983, according to the company, rinse waters were discharged
without a permit to a storm drain outside its building. Process plating acids and chrome plating wastes
were stored on the ground in drums and a 500-gallon tank.
 
In May 1979, the City of Vernon's Health Department found the well serving Hillside Industrial Park, in
which Precision Plating is located, contaminated with hexavalent and trivalent chromium. The rupturing
of drums and the tank by a snowplow was the cause of the contamination, according to the Health
Department and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (CT DEP).
 
In July 1979, CT DEP issued orders to the owners of Hillside Industrial Park and Precision Plating to abate
pollution of the waters of the State. Precision Plating complied with the order. In November 1979, the
company installed five shallow monitoring wells on-site, sampled surface water, and removed 20 cubic
yards of contaminated soil. The company, and later EPA, confirmed that ground water was contaminated
with hexavalent and trivalent chromium. An estimated 10,800 people obtain drinking water from public and
private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Surface waters in the area are used for recreational fishing. The site is within 1 mile of a fresh water
wetland.
 
The site is unfenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with hazardous
substances.
 
In February 1986, CT DEP issued orders requiring Precision Plating to abate pollution and to provide
drinking water to High Manor Mobile Home Park, as well as Hillside Industrial Park. In March 1986, CT
DEP issued the same orders to Hillside Industrial Park. Both companies are negotiating a Consent Order
with the State.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : Under the State orders, Precision Plating and Hillside Industrial Park are
providing alternate drinking water supplies.
 
EPA emergency staff has determined that a removal action is not warranted at this time.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
