NPL Site Narrative for Prewitt Abandoned
Refinery
 
PREWITT ABANDONED REFINERY
Prewitt, New Mexico
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Prewitt Abandoned Refinery Site occupies 75 acres just
east of Prewitt on U.S. Highway 65 in McKinley County, New Mexico. Tract A, consisting of 68.2 acres
south of the highway, contains the ruins of the refinery, including waste pits, tank bases, and other rubble
from equipment that has been removed. Tract B, consisting of 6.8 acres north of the highway, includes two
major spill areas and the remains of a pump lift station.
 
Site operations began in the early 1940s and continued for 25 years under several different owners and
operators, including Petroleum Products Refining Co., Petroleum Products Refining and Producing Co.,
Malco Refineries, New Mexico Asphalt and Refining Co., Malco Asphalt and Refining Co., and El Paso
Natural Gas Products Co. The Navajo Indian Tribe has owned the property since December 1966.
 
According to information provided to EPA under CERCLA Section 103(c), El Paso Natural Gas Products
Co. deposited crude refinery wastes at the site and Petroleum Products Refinery and Producing Co.
deposited wastes listed as hazardous under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
In December 1982, the New Mexico Environmental Improvement Division detected benzene in a nearby
private well, and in May 1986 detected benzene and xylenes in an on-site well to a depth of 17 feet. Wells
within 3 miles of the facility provide water to a public community water system, a public noncommunity
water system, private homes, and livestock. An estimated 1,600 people are served by ground water.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : The former owners of the site have agreed to reduce the immediate hazards
posed by the site by constructing a security fence and treating well water to remove hydrocarbons. Water
treatment for five homes has been completed.
 
The former owners entered into an Administrative Order on Consent with EPA under CERCLA Section 106
on July 11, 1989. Under the order, they are conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to
determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
During Phase I of the RI, monitoring wells were installed and sampled; analysis indicates chromium in
ground water. Soil and sediment samples were also collected and analyzed. An Interim Data Summary
containing Phase I results and a Phase II proposal are to be submitted to EPA during the summer of 1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
