NPL Site Narrative for Price Landfill
 
PRICE LANDFILL
Pleasantville, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : Price Landfill is a 26-acre inactive landfill located in Pleasantville,
New Jersey. While in operation (1969-1976), it accepted industrial wastes containing benzene, chloroform,
and trichloroethylene, septic tank and sewer wastes, sludges, grease, and oil. Some liquid wastes were
poured directly into the landfill, while others were buried in 55-gallon drums. Leachate is noticeable at
various locations on the site, as well as chemical odors and organic vapors. Because their wells are
contaminated, residents of about 35 homes now use bottled water. The well field supplying drinking water
to Atlantic City, 1 mile downgradient of the site, is threatened by the plume of contaminated ground water.
 
This is the top priority site in New Jersey.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA started a number of activities at the site in 1982. During the summer, measures
were taken to provide emergency back-up water supplies for Atlantic City. The measures involved
arranging for new sources and treating existing sources to ensure their quality. EPA has completed a
feasibility study and is developing a long-term remedial action plan. The study involved (1) evaluating
alternatives (including carbon treatment) to protect Atlantic City's water supply, (2) containing or eliminating
additional migration of contaminants from Price Landfill, and (3) dealing with contamination that has
already migrated from the landfill. EPA has approved about $940,000 for the work, under a Cooperative
Agreement and a Superfund State Contract.
 
The Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, has brought a Federal civil action seeking injunctive relief
against the past and present owner, as well as 36 companies and individuals alleged to have generated
and transported waste to the landfill. The District Court denied EPA's request for injunctive relief. The
decision was appealed, and the case was ordered returned to the district court for trial. Several motions
are now pending, and the Government is awaiting an opportunity for discovery.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
