NPL Site Narrative for PSC Resources
 
PSC RESOURCES
Palmer, Massachusetts
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The PSC Resources Site, formerly owned by Philips Resources,
Inc., is located in Palmer, Massachusetts. The property, which abuts a residential area, once covered
3.6 acres and included two buildings with a 1.5-million-gallon storage capacity. Now, the site covers 2
acres and holds 34,000 gallons of waste. The inactive facility reclaimed waste oil from Massachusetts
collection points. These products were then heat treated and sold as a base for lubricating oil, road spray
oil, and fuel. After a spill in June 1982, EPA discovered several leaking tanks and containment dikes, as
well as saturated soils. Surface waters, wetlands, and ground water are directly threatened by the waste.
Trichloroethane and PCBs have been identified in an adjacent swamp.
 
In 1982, acting under Section 311 of the Clean Water Act, EPA required the owner to contain the
oil discharge, determine the contents of 22 tanks, and investigate the possibility of ground water
contamination. In response, the owner sampled tanks, installed a boom in the swamp, and began further
maintenance activities, including the installation of a chain link fence.
 
Status (July 1983) : The State and EPA are monitoring the containment process and are awaiting results
of more extensive sampling and a proposal from the owner detailing how to proceed with the cleanup.
 
EPA recently completed a Remedial Action Master Plan outlining the investigations needed to determine
the full extent of cleanup required at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
