NPL Site Narrative for Quanta Resources
 
QUANTA RESOURCES
Edgewater, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (January 11, 2001) : The Quanta Resources Corporation (QRC) site is located at
163 River Road in Edgewater, Bergen County, New Jersey. The site covers approximately 8 acres since
the expansion of River Road took over a portion of the site. The site property is bordered to the north by
the Celotex Industrial Park, to the south by the former Spencer-Kellogg Industrial Park, to the west by River
Road, and to the east by the Hudson River. From approximately 1930 to 1981 the site had been used as
an oil and tar storage and reclamation facility.
 
Beginning in the early 1930s, Allied Chemical Corporation Asphalt Division (now Allied-Signal) operated a
tar processing plant at the site. In 1974, Allied Chemical sold the property to the estate of Mr. James Frola
and Mr. Albert Von Dohln. In 1977, Mr. Frola and Mr. Van Dohln leased the property to E.R.P. Corporation
for the storage and recycling of oil. Shortly thereafter, E.R.P. assigned its lease to Edgewater Terminals,
Incorporated. Quanta Resources Corporation obtained usage of the property through transfer of the lease
from Edgewater Terminals. The site had 61 above-ground storage tanks (ASTs) with a total capacity of
over 9 million gallons, along with an unknown number of underground storage tanks (USTs) and numerous
underground pipes. These tanks were used to store oil, tar, asphalt, sludge, process water and other
unknown liquids.
 
On July 2, 1981, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) forced the closing of
the Quanta Resources facility when it was discovered that the storage tanks contained large quantities of
oil with polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) concentrations as high as 260 parts per million (ppm).
 
Between 1984 and 1988, removal action activities were conducted at the QRC site. These actions
were supervised by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and focused on the cleaning
and decommissioning of the ASTs and USTs. In addition, some underground piping and shallow soils
containing coal tar were removed from the site. In 1992, EPA conducted an assessment of the previous
removal actions, which included the collection of soil, ground water, and sediment samples. Analytical
results from these sampling activities indicated that CERCLA hazardous substances were still present
on site. From 1992 to present, the EPA Removal Program has conducted several sampling events that
included the collection of surface and subsurface soil samples, and surface water and sediment samples
from the Hudson River in areas where a sheen was observed adjacent to the Quanta Resources site.
Analytical data from these sampling events indicated the presence of elevated levels of polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and metals.
 
Under an Administrative Consent Order with EPA, Allied-Signal contracted GeoSyntac Consultants to
conduct a Removal Site Investigation (RSI) at the QRC site. This investigation was conducted in 1998 and
1999 and included the collection of surface and subsurface soil samples collected from Quanta Resources
property as well as from properties in the vicinity of the Quanta Resources property, ground water samples
collected from monitoring wells, and sediment samples collected from the Hudson River. Based on the
results of activities conducted during the RSI, heavy end coal tar product was estimated to extend from the
area west of where the new River Road exists to approximately 750 feet into the Hudson River.
 
An observed release to surface water by direct observation is documented through the direct
deposition of heavy end coal tar product to the Hudson River. Elevated concentrations of PAHs
(including benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(g,h,i)perylene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, and
dibenzo(a,h,)anthracene) are documented in the Hudson River, which is a fishery and a sensitive
environment (i.e., state-designated water body for the maintenance of aquatic life).
 
Status (September 2002) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
