 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** April 2006 
QUENDALL TERMINALS Renton, WA 
King County 8th Congressional District 
 
à Site Location/Size: 
Quendall Terminals is the site of a former creosote manuf acturing operation. The site is located on the southeastern shore of Lake Washington. It is about 23 acres in size and is relatively flat.  
 
´ Site History: 
The facility began operating in 1917 as the Republic Creo soting Company, which became Reilly Tar and Chemical Corporation in 1956. Creosote was manufactured onsite for about 53 years until 1969. This creosote manufacturing facility refined and processed coal tar and oil-gas tar residues. The tars were purchased from the Seattle Gas Company on Lake Union and were shipped or barged to the site. The tars  consisted of polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) compounds, phenolic compounds, light aromatic compounds (including benzene, to luene, and xylenes) and other organic compounds. At the facility, tar distillates were refined to creosote and other chemical products. Releases of tars and creosote products to the environment occurred in portions of the site where the transport, production and/or storage of  the products were performed. In 1971, the site was sold to Quendall Terminals. Between 1969 and 1978, the site was used intermittently to store diesel, crude and waste oils. Since 1977, the site has been used as a log sorting and storage yard.   
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The primary contaminants of concern are carcinogenic PAHs  and benzene. These contaminants are found in the soil and ground water throughout the site. These compounds are found at concentrations well above State cleanup levels for residential and industrial sites. At some locations on the s ite, creosote product has been found under the surface. In some areas the product is four to six feet thick. Releases of these contaminants to Lake Washingt on are of particular concern.  
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Lake Washington is used for a variety of recreationa l purposes including fishing. The southern end of Lake Washington, including the area where the site is located, is cons idered prime habitat for rearing of juvenile Chinook, which is a Federal Threatened Species, and other salmon stocks. Th e Cedar River, which enters Lake Washington approximately two miles from the site, supports the largest sockeye run in  the contiguous United States. Lake Washington also supports several sensitive environments including habitat for bull trout  and the bald eagle. In addition, there are two swimming beaches located within one half mile of the site.  
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
The Washington Department of Ecology initially was the lead  regulatory agency for overseeing the cleanup, but in May 2005 the Department of Ecology requested EPA take the lead for overseeing the cleanup at the site. EPA assumed the role as the lead regulatory agency at that time. No removal actions have taken place to date. 
Quendall Terminals has completed a Remedial Investigati on report and a draft Risk Assessment/Focused Feasibility Study.  
 
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
