NPL Site Narrative for Railroad Avenue
Groundwater Contamination
 
RAILROAD AVENUE GROUNDWATER CONTAMINATION
Des Moines, Iowa
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 13, 2001) : The Railroad Avenue Groundwater Contamination site is
located in Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa. The site comprises a chlorinated solvent ground water plume
with no identified source. The plume area is about 123 acres in size and is approximately bounded on
the south by the lakes at the south edge of the Raccoon River Park, on the west by 19th Street, on the
north by Holiday Park, and on the east by 5th Street and the Raccoon River. The ground water plume has
impacted wells within the West Des Moines Water Works municipal system, which supplies drinking water
to the residents of West Des Moines. The site is being placed on the NPL because the volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) trichloroethylene (TCE), tetrachloroethylene (PCE), and cis-1,2-dichloroethylene
(cis-1,2-DCE) have been detected in several of the West Des Moines Water Works municipal wells, and
have resulted in five of the contaminated wells being converted from regular use to standby status.
 
The West Des Moines Water Works system supplies a population of 46,980 persons. This population
is served by 19 shallow municipal wells drilled approximately 30 to 50 feet deep in the alluvial aquifer,
and 3 deep wells drilled approximately 2,500 feet deep in the Jordan aquifer. Three additional wells were
nonproducing wells, and thus were abandoned. Water also is purchased from the Des Moines Water
Works, which is supplied by surface water intakes on the Raccoon and Des Moines Rivers. The amount of
water purchased depends on the time of year, with more being purchased during the summer months. In
2000, the percentage of Des Moines water that was blended with the West Des Moines groundwater was 9
percent.
 
In 1991, West Des Moines wells (WDMWs) number 12 and number 13 were put on line for the West Des
Moines Water Works system. The wells were sampled in 1991 and indicated no VOC contamination. In
1993, a routine water distribution sample collected by the city was found to contain cis-1,2-DCE.
 
In 1999, EPA completed a preliminary assessment/site investigation (PA/SI) of the Railroad Avenue
Groundwater site. An expanded site investigation (ESI) was completed in August 2000. PCE and its
degradation products, TCE and cis-1,2-DCE, were detected in nine of the shallow municipal wells during
the PA/SI and/or the ESI. TCE was detected in WDMW number 21 at concentrations above health-based
benchmarks. While both the PA/SI and the ESI verified the presence of VOCs in groundwater, no source of
the contamination could be conclusively identified.
 
Although five of the municipal wells currently do not contribute to the drinking water supply, four additional
wells also have shown contamination. The groundwater plume also poses a threat to ten additional West
Des Moines Water Works municipal wells that draw water from the contaminated shallow aquifer, as well
as an undetermined number of private drinking water wells within four miles of the site.
 
Status (September 2002) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
