 
    
  
  
   
     
   
   
   
    
   
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** April 2009 
RALEIGH STREET DUMP Tampa, Florida Hillsborough County 
àSite Location: The Raleigh Street Dump site is located at the end of Raleigh Street about 0.5 m iles west of U.S. Highway 41 in Tampa, Florida.  This former dumping site occupies approximately five acres on the nor thern and southern side of Raleigh Street. 
´Site History: EPA first discovered this dump site during an investigation of a nearby battery recycling facility, Chloride Metals, Inc. Chloride Metals, Inc. personnel reported ly dumped incinerator slag and battery casings at the Raleigh Street Dump site. Historical aerial photographs of the dump area show that disposal activities occurred from at least 1977 through 1987 and included miscellaneous constructi on debris and trash.  Exide Corporation, the current owner of the Chloride Metals facility, is in bankruptcy. 
rSite Contamination/Contaminants: Metals, pesticides, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and polychlorin
ated biphenyls (PCBs) in soils were found to exceed health-based risk levels.  Some of these contaminants were also found in sediments from drainage ditches and Delaney Creek to the south of  the site.  The majority of the dumping and the most contaminated portion of the site is located north of Raleigh Street in an area of heavy brush, trees and wetlands.  Contamination was also found where the dumping extended south of Raleigh Street.  Lead  was found in onsite surface water, and metals and PAHs were found in shallow ground water. 
vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/E
nvironment: The area surrounding the site is primarily industrial with approximately 26 resident ial properties within a half mile of the site to the east and northeast.  The site is not entirely fenced and is accessibl e to trespassers.  The creek to the south of the site, Delaney Creek, flows into East Bay and u ltimately into Hillsborough Bay.  Recreational and commercial fishing occurs throughout East Bay and Hillsborough Bay.  Th e Florida Department of Health (FDOH) determined that ingestion and inhalation of chemicals from onsite soils or ground water are potential exposure scenarios.  
3Response Activities (to date): In June 2007, EPA issued a proposed plan for cleanup of  contam
inated soils, sediment and ground water.  
}Need for NPL Listing: The State of Florida referred th
e site to EPA because the responsible parties have been unwilling to conduct the cleanup. EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.      
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous subs tances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Subs tances and Disease Registry (A TSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
