NPL Site Narrative for Ravenswood PCE
Ground Water Plume
 
RAVENSWOOD PCE GROUND WATER PLUME
Ravenswood, West Virginia
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (March 8, 2004) : The Ravenswood PCE Ground Water Plume site is located
in Ravenswood, Jackson County, West Virginia. In the immediate vicinity of the plume are urbanized,
residential, and commercial areas. Three of the town's five municipal drinking water wells have shown
tetrachloroethylene (PCE) contamination ranging up to 91.4 parts per billion (ppb). There are three former
dry cleaning facilities, a former trash dump, metal scrap heap, a municipal building (site of a former
electrical power plant), a former waste dump and a former hospital in the vicinity of the plume.
 
The Ravenswood PCE Ground Water Plume site consists of a ground water plume within the unconfined
Quaternary Alluvium aquifer. Two of the municipal wells (Wells 2 and 3) are located in the Ravenswood
City maintenance garage and the others (Wells 1, 4 and 5) are located in the surrounding area on city
property. All of the municipal wells are located within an approximately three- to four-acre area to the
north of the downtown area. The city maintenance building is bound on the north by an open grassy area,
with the adjacent Ravenswood High School and Plaza Drive located beyond; on the south by an asphalt
parking area with the Jackson County Public Library located beyond; on the east by the Ravenswood High
School baseball field; and on the west by Virginia Street.
 
The City Maintenance Building that houses Municipal Wells 2 and 3 was formerly an electrical power plant
owned and operated by the City of Ravenswood. Following closure of the power plant, the building was
converted into the city maintenance garage. PCE may have been used as a cleaning solvent when the
electrical power plant was in use. Municipal Wells 1 through 4 were constructed between 1939 and 1964.
Municipal Well 5 was constructed in 1977.
 
The Ravenswood blended water supply system supplies drinking water to a population of approximately
5,453 persons in the City of Ravenswood, which includes three schools. In addition, the system also
supplies water to approximately 2,479 persons, including two elementary schools, in the Silverton
Public School District. In September of 1998, the City of Ravenswood shut down Municipal Well 3 due
to contamination by PCE. Records indicate PCE contamination has been increasing in the well field
since 1989. Well 3 has consistently shown the highest level of contamination. In August 1998, PCE was
observed at 73.3 ppb in Well 3 and 8.3 ppb in Well 2. The maximum contaminant level (MCL) for PCE
is 5 ppb. In December 1998, the City began pumping Well 3 to the Ravenswood wastewater treatment
plant in an effort to protect the remaining wells from contamination. The City faces a potential for a water
shortage as three of its five wells have historically shown PCE contamination. PCE concentrations in
Well 5 fluctuated between 5.9 and 21.7 ppb in city sampling events in 1999. In October 1999, PCE was
detected at 24 ppb in Well 5 and 6.3 ppb in the finished water. After Well 3 began pumping continuously to
the wastewater plant, contamination in Well 2 diminished and PCE has not been detected in the well since
August 1998. Since June 2000, the water from Wells 3 and 5 has been pumped into a chamber using an
air stripper to remove PCE and this treated water is blended with water from Wells 1, 2, and 4. The finished
water meets the MCL for PCE concentration and is pumped into the distribution system.
 
Status (September 2004) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
