NPL Site Narrative for Raymark Industries,
Inc.
 
RAYMARK INDUSTRIES, INC.
Stratford, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 23, 1993) : The Raymark Industries, Inc. site includes the Raymark
Industries, Inc. facility in Stratford, Fairfield County, Connecticut, and other locations where Raymark
waste has come to be located and which EPA determines pose a significant risk to public health. The
Raymark facility is located on 33.4 acres on East Main Street next to Interstate 95. A public recreation park
containing a baseball diamond and recreation field is located immediately northwest of the site.
 
The Raymark facility operated at this location from 1919 until 1989, manufacturing asbestos brake linings
and other automotive asbestos products. The facility operated as a hazardous waste generator and land
disposal facility. Raymark Industries, Inc. is a RCRA subtitle C regulated facility which is currently subject
to bankruptcy proceedings.
 
Hazardous waste produced on site includes lead-asbestos dust, metals and solvents. From 1919 to
July 1984, Raymark used a system of lagoons to capture waste lead and asbestos dust produced by its
manufacturing process. Dredged materials from the lagoons were landfilled at numerous other locations in
the town of Stratford, Connecticut.
 
Interim actions intended to stabilize waste were initialized by Raymark and EPA at the Raymark facility
and the ballfield in 1992. An intensive surficial sampling program of the other locations where waste from
Raymark is known or suspected to have been received and used as fill was instituted by the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection (CT DEP) and EPA in April 1993. Based on the detection of
elevated concentrations of lead, asbestos, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in surficial soils, the
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) issued a Public Health Advisory on May 25,
1993 for "Raymark Industries/Stratford Asbestos Sites." The presence of dioxins and other contaminants
in Raymark waste has subsequently been confirmed. The advisory was based on the concern that people
could be exposed to site-related contaminants through inhalation, direct dermal contact, ingestion of waste
present in the soil, and consumption of potentially contaminated area seafood.
 
Sampling to determine the vertical extent of contamination at known disposal areas has been conducted to
expedite complete site characterization. Site characterization and initiation of mitigation actions at known
and newly discovered disposal sites are currently underway. Ferry Creek, the Housatonic River, and Long
Island Sound are located downstream of some of the disposal areas. Seed oysters are cultivated in this
ares of Long Island Sound. Crabs and clams may also be recreationally harvested. The total population
within 4 miles is about 145,000.
 
Status (April 1995) : Forty one residential properties have been identified as contaminated with waste
from Raymark. To date, 29 of these properties have been cleaned up by excavating the soils and storing
the waste at the Raymark plant site. It is anticipated that the cleanup for all residential properties will be
complete by November 1995.
 
On April 3, 1995, EPA Issued the Proposed Cleanup Plan for the Raymark property. In addition, EPA is
currently characterizing Ferry Creek and wetland areas where Raymark disposed of its waste. CT DEP has
taken interim actions at the Wooster Junior High School athletic field, Short Beach Park, and at a number
of commercial properties to abate imminent health hazards.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
