NPL Site Narrative for Raytheon Corp.
 
RAYTHEON CORP.
Mountain View, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Raytheon Corp. manufactures semiconductor products
at a plant in Mountain View, Santa Clara County, California. The facility occupies about 30 acres and is
surrounded by industrial, business, and residential areas.
 
Soil and ground water beneath the site are contaminated with trichloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane,
and 1,1- and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, according to analyses conducted by a consultant to Raytheon.
Contamination is believed to have resulted from a leaking underground chemical storage tank and/or
concrete acid neutralization sumps. About 270,000 people depend on wells within 3 miles of the site as a
source of drinking water.
 
In late 1982, Raytheon conducted an investigation to determine if downgradient ground water
contamination near the north property boundary resulted from a source on its property. Raytheon
concluded that it was not possible to establish a specific source of contamination based on data obtained
from its investigation. At present, Raytheon is working with the California Regional Water Quality Control
Board (CRWQCB) to determine the full extent of the problem.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In an attempt to determine the full extent of ground water contamination,
Raytheon has installed three wells to pump and treat ground water to contain the contaminated plume.
 
CRWQCB has issued Waste Discharge Requirements to the company. The requirements are the board's
legal mechanism for regulating activities at facilities under its jurisdiction.
 
On August 15, 1985, EPA issued a CERCLA Administrative Order on Consent to Raytheon Corp.'s
Mountain View Plant, as well as to Fairchild Camera's and Intel Corp.'s Mountain View Plants. The order
calls for the three companies to conduct a joint remedial investigation/feasibility study of the area to
determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
