NPL Site Narrative for Re-Solve, Inc.
 
RE-SOLVE, INC.
Dartmouth, Massachusetts
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : Re-Solve, Inc., reclaimed solvents for 24 years on a 6-acre site
in Dartmouth, Massachusetts, before closing voluntarily in October 1980. The site is in a rural area of
few residences, deep woods, and an adjacent wetland. Preliminary data indicate that the ground water is
shallow, with flow toward the Copicut River 500 feet east. On site are unlined waste lagoons containing
high concentrations of solvents, PCBs, and toxic metals. The lagoons, which are within 12 to 18 inches of
overflowing, are in poor condition. The bottoms of the lagoons are situated in the water table, and some
contaminants have migrated to ground water. Surface waters are threatened by ground water discharge,
run-off, and potential lagoon overflows.
 
In 1980, when Re-Solve closed the facility, it surrendered its State license and sold the property to the
current owner. The State required the company to remove all hazardous waste from the site and to take
certain other actions. The company refused, and the State started an enforcement action.
 
Status (July 1983) : In August 1982, EPA started a remedial investigation to determine the extent and type
of contamination at the site and a feasibility study, which recommended alternatives for remedial action.
The final cleanup option for source removal and encapsulation is estimated to cost $3 million. Design for
this work is scheduled to start in the summer of 1983.
 
EPA began negotiations for remedial action with responsible parties on June 14, 1983. Negotiations for
surface cleanup by responsible parties will be concluded later in the year.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
