NPL Site Narrative for Recticon/Allied
Steel Corp.
 
RECTICON/ALLIED STEEL CORP.
East Coventry Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Recticon/Allied Steel Corp. Site covers 5 acres on Route
724 and Wells Road in East Coventry Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania. The area is primarily
residential. As early as 1979, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER)
detected trichloroethylene (TCE) in ground water in the region. Others have verified the contamination
since then.
 
Recticon, a subsidiary of Rockwell International, manufactured silicon wafers during 1974-81. In 1980, a
Recticon contractor found TCE in Recticon plant drain lines, in sludge trapped within buried waste lines,
and in soils. In May 1981, Recticon removed contaminated soil and transported it to a hazardous waste
facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Recticon and
PA DER entered into a Consent Order and Agreement in October 1981 under which Recticon agreed to
pump and treat ground water. The subsequent pumping and treatment, however, have had little effect on
the contamination problem.
 
Since 1972, Allied Steel Corp. has fabricated steel on a property 100 feet to the southeast of Recticon.
Previous owners of the property did not use the facility for steel fabrication. In 1984, an Allied contractor
determined that leakage in the area of Allied's compressor room had released TCE to the ground. Also,
high levels of TCE were found in Allied's on-site well.
 
An estimated 17,300 people obtain drinking water from Citizen's Home Utility Water Co. wells and private
wells within 3 miles of the site. Run-off from the site reaches the Schuylkill River 2,400 feet downstream of
the site. Citizen's Home Utility Water Co. maintains a water intake 3,100 feet downstream of the site. The
company blends water from the river with that from the wells to serve its 11,500 customers.
 
The facility is being proposed for the NPL because it is classified as a "protective filer" under Subtitle C of
RCRA and so is not subject to Subtitle C corrective action authorities.
 
Status (September 1988) : EPA is conducting a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site and will then negotiate with them to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
