NPL Site Narrative for Redwing Carriers,
Inc. (Saraland)
 
REDWING CARRIERS, INC. (SARALAND)
Saraland, Alabama
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Redwing Carriers, Inc., started operating a chemical-
transporting business in March 1961 on 1 acre at Number 527 on U.S. 43 in Saraland, Mobile County,
Alabama. The company sold the property in May 1971 and relocated to Creola, Alabama, in 1972.
Redwing used the Saraland site as a parking and washing terminal for its trucks, which reportedly carried
numerous substances, including asphalt, diesel fuel, pesticides, tall oil, and sulfuric acid. After the property
was sold, it was covered with fill material and graded. An apartment complex housing approximately 160
people was then built on the site.
 
After residents of the apartment complex noticed tar-like material oozing to the surface at numerous
locations, the Alabama Department of Environmental Management inspected the complex and then
notified EPA. In April and May 1985, EPA detected high concentrations of 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene and
naphthalene in the soil and in leachate coming from the tarry material. On July 3, 1985, EPA issued an
Administrative Order on Consent calling for Redwing to remove the tar-like material. In response, Redwing
removed some of the contaminated soil to a hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The company periodically inspects the site and removes any tar
rising to the surface.
 
The primary aquifer underlying the site is a group of alluvial and terrace deposits ranging in thickness from
a thin veneer to more than 150 feet and consisting of fine- to coarse-grained sands, gravels, silts, sandy
clay, and organic material. The ground water in the vicinity of the site is approximately 10 feet below the
surface. These conditions facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water. Drinking water in the
area is supplied by the City of Saraland Water Department, which obtains its water from three 100-foot-
deep wells less than 2 miles from the site. The drinking water of 19,000 people is potentially threatened.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
