NPL Site Narrative for Reeser's Landfill
 
REESER'S LANDFILL
Upper Macungie Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : Reeser's Landfill is an inactive 50-acre unlined dump for
municipal wastes near Haafsville in Upper Macungie Township, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania. Initially, the
site owner operated the landfill. Later, the facility was leased to Reeser's Hauling Service. Reeser's applied
for but never received a permit to operate the landfill from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources (PA DER). Operations ceased in 1981.
 
The landfill is inadequately covered. Soil is stained by leachate coming out of filled areas. A hole that
resulted from excavation of burned wastes is filled with water. According to PA DER files, wastes were
dumped into a water-filled quarry and into excavated trenches, possibly permitting the wastes to enter
ground water. Homes in the immediate area rely on individual wells for drinking water. Lehigh County
Water Authority municipal supply wells serving approximately 3,400 people are within 3 miles of the site.
Most of the landfill drains to Iron Run, a tributary to Little Lehigh Creek.
 
Limited sampling by PA DER of two monitoring wells in the area detected zinc, lead, and relatively high
levels of organic chemicals. In August 1983, EPA detected heavy metals, including cadmium, lead, zinc,
and mercury, in on-site soils, surface water, and/or sediment samples. Mercury in a downstream water
sample was three times EPA's Revised Ambient Water Quality Criteria.
 
PA DER issued orders to close Reeser's Landfill on June 22, 1979 and February 3, 1981. Both orders are
pending under appeal by the site owner.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : In a March 1987 inspection, EPA observed stressed vegetation on the landfill,
probably due to methane.
 
EPA is preparing a workplan for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (May 31, 1990) : This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under
CERCLA has been implemented, and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
