NPL Site Narrative for Reilly Tar &
Chemical Corp. (St. Louis Park Plant)
 
REILLY TAR & CHEMICAL CORP. (ST. LOUIS PARK PLANT)
St. Louis Park, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : Between 1917 and 1972, Reilly Tar & Chemical Corp. operated a
coal tar distillation and wood preserving plant on 80 acres in St. Louis Park, Minnesota. Wastes from the
operation were disposed of on the site and in a network of ditches that discharged to an adjacent wetland.
The wastes contained many compounds, including polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), some of
which are carcinogenic. Soil and ground water below the wetland and the southern portion of the site are
heavily contaminated. Seven wells have been closed. All draw on the Prairie du Chien-Jordan Aquifer,
which provides most of the drinking water for local communities. In the late 1970s, 28 multiaquifer wells
were reconstructed to prevent the spread of contamination.
 
In July 1981, EPA awarded a $200,000 Cooperative Agreement to Minnesota, using funds made available
under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). The funds were used to clean out two deep
wells on the site and conduct a complete off-site well survey. In September 1981, an additional $200,000 in
RCRA funds was awarded to perform a water treatability study on the closed municipal wells.
 
This is the top priority site in Minnesota.
 
Status (July 1983) : In December 1982, EPA awarded a $1,993,287 Cooperative Agreement to Minnesota
to plug additional multiaquifer wells, test the State's proposed gradient system to control migration of
contamination to existing wells, and conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study of contaminated soils.
The work is scheduled to be completed in the first quarter of 1984.
 
The Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, has brought a Federal civil action under RCRA and CERCLA
against parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with this site. The action seeks injunctive relief
and the costs incurred in response actions at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
