NPL Site Narrative for Revere Chemical
Co.
 
REVERE CHEMICAL CO.
Nockamixon Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : The Revere Chemical Co. Site covers about 10 acres
off Route 611, just north of Route 412, in Nockamixon Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania. The plant
recovered metals until December 1969, when a U.S. District Court, in an action filed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources, closed it because it failed to prevent discharge of contaminants
to a tributary of Rapp Creek.
 
While the plant operated, wastes containing chromic acid, copper sulfate, sulfuric acid, and ammonia were
stored in unlined earthen lagoons. In 1972, the wastes were treated and then buried on-site or removed
from the site.
 
Analyses conducted by EPA in May 1984 detected high concentrations of copper in run-off to Rapp Creek,
which is used for recreational activities, and chromium, copper, and lead in downstream samples of both
the south and east tributaries of Rapp Creek.
 
About 2,500 people depend on private wells within 3 miles of the site as their source of drinking water.
 
In March and April 1984, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to remove 22 drums of waste chromic acid
and excavate 30 cubic yards of sludge containing copper and chromium. All materials were sent to an
EPA-regulated hazardous waste facility.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is discussing the possibility that Revere Chemical Co. will conduct a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
