NPL Site Narrative for Revere Textile
Prints Corp.
 
REVERE TEXTILE PRINTS CORP.
Sterling, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Revere Textile Prints Corp. Site covers 2 to 3 acres in the
center of the Town of Sterling, Windham County, Connecticut. The textile processing facility first operated
over 50 years ago as the U.S. Finishing Co. It was later sold to an individual who gave it the current name.
In 1978, a town employee allegedly observed Revere Textile employees dumping barrels of wastes into
the Moosup River. The facility was destroyed by fire in March 1980. Following the fire, a number of drums
were evident in the ruins of two buildings on the site.
 
In June 1980, the property was again sold. On the site at the time were over 1,500 leaking drums
containing dyes, paints, solvents, and heavy metals. In September 1980, the Connecticut Department
of Environmental Protection (CT DEP) detected over 30 compounds, including benzene, toluene,
cyclohexane, isopropyl ether, xylene, 1,1,2-trichloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, and heavy metals in
the drums and soil on-site. Later in the month, CT DEP issued a five-part order against the new owner to
clean up the site.
 
In 1982, ownership of the site was transferred to Sterling Industrial Park Corp. (SIPC). After several CT
DEP inspections and rounds of sampling, the drums were removed in September 1983 by a contractor
hired by SIPC. An unknown quantity of contaminated soil was also removed.
 
A consultant hired by SIPC to do a hydrogeological investigation sampled on-site monitoring wells in
January and March 1984. Toluene, 1,1,2-trichloroethylene, and 1,1,1-trichloroethane were detected, the
maximum concentration being 14 parts per billion. About 4,500 people in Sterling and the surrounding area
depend on wells as their sole source of drinking water.
 
Moosup River downgradient of the site was contaminated with low levels of 1,1,2-trichloroethylene,
according to analyses conducted as part of the hydrogeological investigation. The river is used for
recreational activities. In addition, volatile organic chemicals were detected during the investigation in the
only soil sample for which results are available. Following publication of the results from the investigation,
CT DEP verified that the site owner was in compliance with the cleanup order.
 
In April 1985, while conducting a site inspection, EPA sampled three water supply wells within 1 mile of the
site and found none of the suspected contaminants in any of the wells.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
