NPL Site Narrative for Reynolds Metals
Company
 
REYNOLDS METALS COMPANY
Troutdale, Oregon
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (August 23, 1994) : The Reynolds facility is a primary aluminum reduction plant
where alumina from bauxite is reduced to aluminum. The facility is approximately 1.25 miles north of the
City of Troutdale, Oregon. The Columbia River forms its northern border and the Sandy River forms its
eastern border. A dike surrounds the plant on the northern and eastern sides, and protects the plant from
floods. Site areas north and east of the dike are within the 100-year flood plain.
 
The plant was completed in 1941 for the United States government war-time operations. Reynolds first
leased the plant from the government in June 1946, and purchased it in June 1949. Currently, Reynolds
owns the 80.25-acre plant area and approximately 500 surrounding acres. The aluminum reduction plant
has been shut down since November 1991 for economic reasons. Currently, there are approximately 100
workers for maintenance, security, administration, and casting ingots from molten aluminum transported to
the plant from the Reynolds reduction plant in Longview, Washington.
 
Large quantities of wastes were produced at the Reynolds plant during the production of aluminum.
Twenty-one separate waste streams were identified by Reynolds in response to an EPA information
request letter. Major hazardous substances of concern include polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs),
aluminum and other metals associated with bauxite, cyanide, fluoride, and polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) from electrical equipment.
 
In May 1993, an EPA contractor collected samples at the Reynolds site. On-site sampling included
surface and subsurface soil, sediment, surface water, ground water and an unknown waste pile. Elevated
concentrations of cyanide, PAHs, many metals, and fluoride were detected in various sources on site.
Elevated levels of cyanide and fluoride were detected in several on-site drinking water wells. Significant
concentrations of aluminum, barium, manganese, cyanide, and fluoride were detected in the surface water
samples. Concentrations of copper and cyanide in an on-site drainage ditch which flows to an on-site lake
and then the Columbia River exceeded the freshwater quality criteria promulgated under the Clean Water
Act. Elevated concentrations of fluoride, metals, and extremely high concentrations of PAHs were detected
in sediment samples taken from the ditch and lake. The same contaminants were also detected in on-site
wetlands.
 
The Columbia and Sandy Rivers are used for recreation and fishing, people reach the rivers through the
Reynolds property. Anadromous fish are found in both rivers as well as numerous sensitive environments.
 
The Reynolds Metals Company (RMC) has expressed an interest in investigating and conducting early
actions under the EPA Removal Program. RMC has initiated an integrated assessment under EPA
oversight. The scheduled seven week assessment is the first phase of investigations and is a cooperative
effort between RMC and EPA. On-site ground water contamination and newly discovered dump sites are
being characterized and evaluated for expedited response actions.
 
Status (December 1994) : RMC completed field work in summer of 1994 which will help determine time-
critical actions, non-time-critical actions, and further investigations to be conducted at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
