NPL Site Narrative for Richardson Hill
Road Landfill/Pond
 
RICHARDSON HILL ROAD LANDFILL/POND
Sidney Center, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Richardson Hill Road Landfill/Pond Site consists of 2 areas,
a northern and a southern section covering approximately 6 acres on the west side of Richardson Hill Road
in Sidney Center, Delaware County, New York. Within the eastern edge of the southern section is a waste
oil pond or pit measuring approximately 20 feet by 80 feet. Bendix Corp.'s Electrical Components Division
disposed of waste oils, equipment, and parts at the site from about 1963 until 1970, when it was closed by
the State. The Town of Sidney's sanitary landfill is northeast of the site on the other side of Richardson Hill
Road.
 
A spring near the site is contaminated with trans-1,2-dichloroethylene and trichloroethylene, according to
EPA tests conducted in 1981. About 1,000 people depend on private wells within 3 miles of the site for
drinking water. The nearest well is less than 2,000 feet from the site. Three residential wells near the site
are contaminated with trans-1,2-dichloroethylene and trichloroethylene, according to tests conducted by
the State Department of Health in 1985. No alternate water supply is available. Since August 1985, Allied
Corp., which now owns Bendix, has been voluntarily providing bottled water to the affected residences. In
addition, in December 1985, Allied Corp. capped the waste oil pit to prevent surface run-off and reduce
percolation of contamination into ground water.
 
Culverts beneath Richardson Hill Road drain from the site to the east into a marshy area with two beaver
ponds. EPA detected PCBs, trichloroethylene, vinyl chloride, and toluene in the ponds in 1981. The marshy
area drains to Herrick Hollow Creek, which flows into Trout Creek. Eventually, the drainage reaches the
Cannonsville Reservoir, which is part of the New York City public drinking water supply system.
 
During an inspection conducted in 1984, the State observed crushed drums in the waste oil pond. The site
was unfenced. The marshy area nearby was covered with oil and sludge, and odors were noticeable.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is negotiating an Administrative Consent Order with Allied Corp. for
the company to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
