 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Restore to NPL*** September 2006 
 
RINGWOOD MINES/LANDFILL Ringwood, New Jersey 
Passaic County  
 
à Site Location: 
 The Ringwood Mines/Landfill Site is located in an historic ir on mining district in the Borough of Ringwood, Passaic County, New Jersey. The site spans 500 acres and includes abandoned mine shaf ts and pits, inactive landfills and open waste dumps. During t he late 1960s and early 1970s, the site was used for various periods of time by the Borough of  Ringwood, Ford and others (including ill egal third-party dumpers) for the disposal of a large variety of waste materials including commercia l and municipal wastes, abandoned cars, appliances, paint sludge and other miscellaneous waste and debris. 
 
´ Site History: 
 The site was added to the National Priorities List (NPL)  in 1983. From March 1984 through April 1988, Ford, with EPA oversight, investigated the nature and extent of contamination at  the site. The results of this investigation prompted EPA to order Ford to excavate and dispose of paint sludge identified at the site, and to require Ford to monitor ground water and surface water on a long- term basis. Ford performed cleanup work at the site in 1987- 1988, removing 7,700 cubic yards of paint sludge and soil. In 1990, Ford removed approximately 600 cubic yards of paint sludge as well as 54 intact and crushed drums.  
 Results of ground water monitoring conduc ted well into the 1990s indicated no presence of a groundwater plume or any other continuing source of groundwater contaminati on.  EPA deleted the site from the NPL in  1994, based upon a determination that all  appropriate cleanup actions had been implemented. 
 In 1995, 1998, and 2004, newly discovered pockets of paint sludge  were discovered at the site, prompting further cleanup actio ns. Ford, under EPA direction, is currently excavating the paint sludge. Since December 2004, an additional 16,400 tons of paint sl udge and soil have been removed from the site as part of the ongoing cleanup effort. Furthermore, in September 2005, Ford entered in to an agreement with EPA to conduct a comprehensive re-investigation of the site, to ensure that all remaining wastes are identified.  EPA is currently overseeing the re-investigation of the site.  
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 Contaminants of concern at the site include industrial paint wastes and their chem ical constituents, including benzene, xylene , and toluene. 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
 The human receptors threatened by these new areas include users of the state park for general recreation including hiking, wil dlife observation, and hunting and fishing.  There may also be poten tial surface contamination on some of the residential properties.  Environmentally sensitive areas threatened by the site include the areas in the state park established to preserve the remaining natural environment, wetlands, and the fish and wildlife in watershed, and surrounding lands. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
 In the Fall of 2005, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) began  investigating residential properties for the presence of paint sludge. NJDEP excavated chunks of visi ble paint sludge from areas located on or immediately adjacent to three upper Ringwood residences.  In addition, Ford is currently  implementing work plans approved by both EPA and NJDEP to address remnant paint sludge. Ford has conducted extensive inves tigative and removal work activities on the site over the past several years, including additional sampling and a site-wide reconnaissan ce survey.  Ford has removed paint sludge and is currently undertaking focused investigations on the O’Connor Disposal Area, the Cannon Mine Pit and the Peter’s Mine Pit. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
