NPL Site Narrative for River Road Landfill
(Waste Management, Inc.)
 
RIVER ROAD LANDFILL (WASTE MANAGEMENT, INC.)
Hermitage, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : River Road Landfill covers approximately 102 acres in
Hermitage and South Pymatuning, Mercer County, Pennsylvania. It is owned by Waste Management of
Pennsylvania, Inc., a subsidiary of Waste Management, Inc. The landfill has operated since 1962 as a
sanitary landfill, accepting industrial, residential, and an unknown quantity of hazardous wastes. In 1984, it
received a State permit to dispose of solid waste.
 
According to tests conducted in 1980 by a consultant to Waste Management, sludge disposed at the site
contained PCBs.
 
In June 1985, EPA detected PCBs in sediments in a diversion ditch that discharges to the Shenango River.
The ditch collected run-off from the landfill. The Shenango Valley Water Co. and Masury Water Co. draw
water for approximately 75,000 customers at a point 2 miles downstream of the landfill. EPA also detected
chloroethane and 1,1-dichloroethane in wells on and off the site.
 
The site is not completely fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact
with hazardous substances in the diversion ditch.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : In 1987, Waste Management closed the landfill under a plan approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. The plan included installing a cap on the landfill,
an updated leachate collection system, erosion and sedimentation controls, revegetation, and fencing.
 
After conducting a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site in May
1989, EPA sent notice letters to several informing them of their potential liability. EPA is investigating the
possibility that they will conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
