 OLEM/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May 2018 
RIVER CITY METAL FINISHING San Antonio, Texas  Bexar County 
  Site Location: The River City Metal Finishing (RCMF) facility is located approximately 1.3 miles west of W. Loop 1604 in San Antonio, Texas.   Site History: River City Metal Finishing is a former metal plating shop that operated from 1994 until approximately 2002. Contaminant releases from the facility have resulted in site contaminants entering shallow ground water and the migration of that contamination into the Edwards Aquifer.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: Soil and ground water are contaminated with heavy metals and cyanide associated with metal plating. Cyanide, lead, cadmium, copper, selenium, zinc, chromium and hexavalent chromium are contaminating on -site soils and underlying ground water. Hexavalent chromium was found at concentrations exceeding the Safe Drinking Water Act’s Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) within monitoring wells located in the shallow ground water and below the MCL in public supply wells completed in the Edwards Aquifer.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : The Edwards Aquifer system is the sole source of water for the San Antonio area, where it provides domestic, industrial and agricultural water. There are 20 public supply wells located within four miles of the site. Because of the geologic formations, fractured limestone, karst conditions and interconnected aquifers, contamination may enter the aquifer and migrate through fractures. Without investigation and remediation of the contaminated ground water plume, contamination may migrate to additional public water supply wells and private wells.   Response Activities (to date): In August 2013, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) removed drums and containers of waste from the site and demolished the building, carport and concrete foundations and disposed the materials off- site.   Need for NPL Listing: The TCEQ referred the site to the EPA due to hexavalent chromium in ground water used for drinking. Without identification and investigation of the source of ground water contamination and remediation of the contaminated ground water plume, additional public and private wells may be contaminated. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Texas. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices]   For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposur e to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
 
