NPL Site Narrative for Robins Air Force
Base (Landfill #4/Sludge Lagoon)
 
ROBINS AIR FORCE BASE (LANDFILL #4/SLUDGE LAGOON)
Houston County, Georgia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Robins Air Force Base covers 8,855 acres east of the City
of Warner Robins in Houston County in middle Georgia. It includes a 1,200-acre wetland. The base has
13 areas that contain hazardous waste from past disposal activities. Two areas comprise this NPL site:
Landfill #4, where 200 drums are stored, and an adjacent sludge lagoon. This site covers 40-45 acres and
is in a mixed hardwood swamp along the western border of the Ocmulgee River floodplains. The landfill
operated from 1965 to 1978 and accepted general refuse, garbage, and industrial wastes. The lagoon
operated from about 1962 to 1978 and accepted wastes from two industrial waste treatment plants plus
other waste chemicals.
 
This site was originally proposed under the name "Robins Air Force Base." It is being renamed at this time
to identify more specifically the NPL site of concern.
 
The base is located in the Coastal Plain of Georgia and is underlain by units of the highly permeable
Cretaceous Aquifer of Georgia. The water supplies for the base and the City of Warner Robins are
derived from this aquifer. More than 10,000 people are potentially affected. Trichloroethylene and
tetrachloroethylene have been detected in ground water near the site, and phenols have been detected in
surface water on the site.
 
Robins Air Force Base is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under
this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The Air Force has completed Phase I (records search). Phase II (preliminary survey)
is underway.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : In September-October 1986, EPA directed work at the lagoon and landfill, which
included installation of monitoring wells and sampling of soils, streams, and the wells. The information will
be used to identify the appropriate remedial action. A technical advisory group involving the Air Force, its
contractors, the State, and EPA will coordinate the remedial action.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
