 
   
   
  
   
      
   
    
  
   
  
 
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2009 
B.F. GOODRICH Rialto, California San Bernardino County 
Site Location: The site is located in western San Bernardino County, California, about 60 miles east of Los Angeles in suburban Southern California. Most or all of the site is located in the Rialto-Colton Groundwater Basin. Site History: Since it was developed in the 1940s, part of the site has been used by a succession of businesses to test and manufacture munitions, rocket motors, and pyrotechnics.  Soil and ground water contamination at the site is believed to have resulted largely from industrial operations that pre-date current regulatory programs.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: Trichloroethene (TCE) and perchlorate have contaminated a large area of ground water at the site in excess of Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs).  The area of ground water contamination is more than three miles long and reaches a depth of over 800 feet below ground surface.    Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: The Rialto-Colton Groundwater Basin is an important source of  drinking water to residents and businesses in the cities of Rialto, Colton, and Fontana. Several municipal drinking water wells are believed to be contaminated with TCE and/or perchlorate from the site and have been shut down.  These wells serve water to tens of thousands of people.     Response Activities (to date): Since late 2002, EPA has been assisting the State and local water agencies by providing technical, enforcement, and financial assistance. In 2008, EPA began a Remedial Inves tigation and Feasibility Study at the site.  The affected water utilities have also installed water treatment systems on contaminated wells that may be affected by site contaminants, with financial assistance provided by the state, EPA, DOD, and a potentially responsible party.  The treatment systems have been designed to meet immediate water supply needs of the community, rather than clean up the contamination.    Need for NPL Listing: The State of California referred the site to EPA after evaluating other federal and state cleanup programs.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
