NPL Site Narrative for Rock Hill Chemical
Co.
 
ROCK HILL CHEMICAL CO.
Rock Hill, South Carolina
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Rock Hill Chemical Co. operated a solvent distillation facility
in the 1960s on approximately 4.5 acres on North Cherry Road in a light commercial and residential area
of Rock Hill, York County, South Carolina. The company distilled paint solvents and reportedly recovered
textile dye products. Some of the residue from the bottoms of the storage tanks and drums was placed in
piles on the surface and later covered with dirt and construction debris. The facility was abandoned after it
burned in 1964. The site is now owned by Rutledge Enterprise and First Federal Savings and Loan.
 
In an inspection in 1985, EPA discovered aboveground tanks, an underground tank, a sludge pile,
and an area of discolored soil. EPA analyses revealed lead, PCBs, chromium, methylene chloride,
and 1,2-dichloroethane in waste and oil samples and trichloro ethylene, 1,2-dichloroethane, trans-1,2-
dichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene in an on-site well. An estimated 1,100 people obtain drinking
water from wells within 3 miles of the site. The South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental
Control (SCDHEC) advised a nearby business to stop using its well. The owner of an adjacent trailer park
(approximately 200 residents) hooked the park up to a municipal water system.
 
In 1986, SCDHEC detected PCBs and other organic compounds, including trichloroethane and
tetrachloroethane, in the unnamed tributary to the Catawba River that drains the site. Fort Mill draws
drinking water for an estimated 5,500 people from an intake into the Catawba River that is approximately 2
miles downstream of the site.
 
In 1986, First Federal transported approximately 41 cubic yards of paint sludges and still bottoms to a
hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA). In late 1987, under an EPA Administrative Order issued under CERCLA Section 106 and RCRA
Section 7003, Rutledge Enterprises discharged approximately 2,000 gallons of waste water contaminated
with solvents, in limited amounts per day, into the sewer system for treatment in the municipal sewage
treatment plant.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
Several parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site recently removed additional
sludge from the site under supervision of EPA emergency personnel.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
