NPL Site Narrative for Rockwool
Industries Inc.
 
ROCKWOOL INDUSTRIES INC.
Bell County, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (March 1998) : The Rockwool Industries, Inc. (Rockwool) site is located at
1741 Taylors Valley Road, approximately one mile east of Belton, Bell County, Central Texas. The site
occupies approximately 100 acres of land zoned for heavy industrial use. The Rockwool facility operated
as a mineral wool insulation manufacturing plant from mid-1950 until February 1987. The site is currently
inactive. Rockwool manufactured two types of mineral wool insulation, blow wool and batt wool. Blow
wool, which is generally spray-blown into attics and other enclosed spaces to provide thermal insulation, is
composed of bulk mineral wool fibers lightly coated with lubricating oil. Batt wool is typically used for wall
insulation and consists of mineral wool that is bound with an organic resin and sandwiched into paper.
 
Known sources of contamination addressed in the Hazard Ranking System scoring package are
contaminated soils associated with the South Shot Pile (estimated to contain 20,000 to 30,000 cubic yards
of waste), the North Shot Pile (estimated to contain between 15,000 and 25,000 cubic yards of waste), and
the Cemetery Shot Pile (waste volume unknown).
 
Surface water is the major pathway of concern. Chemical analysis of sediment samples in the Leon River
and Nolan Creek indicated the presence of inorganics in concentrations above the release criteria. The
Leon River is an identified fishery and is subject to Level II concentrations of selenium.
 
Status (September 1998) : EPA plans to begin a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) on the
site during the late fall/early winter of 1998.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
