NPL Site Narrative for Rockwell
International Corp. (Allegan Plant)
 
ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL CORP. (ALLEGAN PLANT)
Allegan, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : Rockwell International Corp. manufactures universal joints
for the automotive industry on a 30.4-acre site in Allegan, Allegan County, Michigan. The plant is in
a residential neighborhood and on the banks of the Kalamazoo River, which is used for recreational
activities.
 
During 1910-60, the company discharged waste water containing sludge, heavy metals, process wastes,
and oils into the Kalamazoo River. During 1960-72, the waste water was discharged into two unlined ponds
on the site. In 1972, the company built a plant to treat cutting fluid wastes, which contain emulsified oils,
ferric chloride, sodium hydroxide, and a polymer flocculent. The treated wastes were discharged into one
of two unlined ponds.
 
Ground water on the site is contaminated with lead, arsenic, cyanide, and 4-methyl-2-pentanone,
according to tests conducted by EPA. Private wells downgradient of the plant are contaminated with heavy
metals and cyanide, according to EPA. About 6,900 people depend on shallow wells within 3 miles of the
site as a source of drinking water. EPA also detected heavy metals and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
in the Kalamazoo River.
 
In October 1980, Rockwell received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act by filing Part A of a permit application. Later, Rockwell withdrew the application because it
did not meet Interim Status criteria.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
