NPL Site Narrative for Rogers Road
Municipal Landfill
 
ROGERS ROAD MUNICIPAL LANDFILL
Jacksonville, Arkansas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Rogers Road Municipal Landfill covers approximately
10 acres on Rogers Road in Jacksonville, Arkansas, just inside the Pulaski County line. The city purchased
the site on September 16, 1953, and operated it as a municipal landfill until October 1974. It had no permit
and kept no records of the wastes it accepted. The landfill closed when the Arkansas Department of
Pollution Control and Ecology turned down an application for a permit. Based on the terms of the purchase
contract, the property reverted back to the original owner (now deceased).
 
In May 1985, while sampling the Jacksonville Municipal Landfill (which is also being proposed for the NPL
at this time), EPA received a complaint from a citizen regarding the Rogers Road Municipal Landfill 0.5
mile away. EPA visited Rogers Road, and two weeks later inspected the site. A lagoon was found, as well
as about 30 deteriorating drums giving off a strong chemical odor. Soil around the drums and lagoons,
as well as the run-off paths, appeared contaminated. In addition to municipal waste, the landfill accepted
industrial and chemical waste.
 
On-site soil and the drums are contaminated with 2,4-D, 2,4,5-T, dioxin, PCB (Aroclor-1254), and
trichloroethylene, according to EPA tests.
 
The landfill had no liner. Drainage is poor, allowing water to pond. Ground water is shallow (5 feet). Wastes
were deposited as deep as 20 feet. An estimated 10,100 people draw drinking water from public and
private wells within 3 miles of the site. A private well is 2,640 feet from the site.
 
In early 1986, the City of Jacksonville fenced the site to prevent public access.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is planning for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
