NPL Site Narrative for Rolling Knolls
Landfill
 
ROLLING KNOLLS LANDFILL
Chatham Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 30, 2003) : The Rolling Knolls Landfill facility is an approximately 200-
acre, unlined, former municipal landfill located at 35 Britten Road in the Green Village section of Chatham
Township, Morris County, New Jersey. The facility is bound by the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge
to the east, south, and west; Loantaka Brook and private property to the west; and private residential
properties to the north and northwest. The Rolling Knolls Landfill overlaps the Refuge on its eastern and
southern sides.
 
The Rolling Knolls facility operated as a municipal landfill from the early 1930s through December 1968.
During that time, Rolling Knolls Landfill received municipal solid waste, as well as construction and
demolition debris from surrounding municipalities. Chatham Township Board of Health (CTBH) records
indicate that the types of wastes deposited at Rolling Knolls included tree stumps, scrap metal, tires,
household refuse, residential septage wastes, and industrial waste. In order to comply with health code
regulations adopted in 1959, operational procedures at the facility included the application of pesticides to
control weeds, insects, and rodents, as well as the application of oil on facility roadways to control dust.
In addition, health code regulation also required the application of minimal daily cover (6 inches) to all
exposed surfaces including the face of the fill. Chatham Township records indicate that semi-liquid swamp
muck was picked up from the edge of the landfill using a dragline and applied as the daily cover.
 
One source has been identified for the HRS evaluation of the site: The Rolling Knolls Landfill. Analytical
results of soil samples collected from the site by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) during
the May 1999 Expanded Site Inspection (ESI), indicate elevated levels (i.e., above regulatory levels) of
metals, phthalates, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
 
The facility is bound by the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge to the east, south, and west. The
Refuge is a designated national wildlife refuge and is habitat known to be used by state- and federally-
designated or proposed endangered or threatened species. There is a documented observed release of
mercury and PCBs to a surface water/sediment sampling location in a portion of the landfill that is situated
within the boundaries of the Refuge.
 
Drainage from the landfill flows directly to Black Brook and to Great Brook via Loantaka Brook. All are
perennial streams that ultimately discharge to the Passaic River. The Passaic River supports human food
chain species and is fished.
 
The waste source samples collected from the landfill by EPA in May 1999 document contamination. The
southern and eastern portions of the Rolling Knolls Landfill lie within the boundaries of the Refuge, which
is a designated national wildlife refuge and wilderness area, and is habitat known to be used by state- and
federally-designated or proposed endangered or threatened species. Therefore, waste source samples
collected from the landfill by EPA in May 1999 document actual contamination of a terrestrial sensitive
environment. Private, residential properties border the facility on the west, north, and northwest. Waste
source samples collected by EPA in May 1999 document potential exposure of nearby residents. The
Rolling Knolls facility is accessible and is not covered by a permanent, or otherwise maintained essentially
impenetrable material.
 
Status (September 2003) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
