NPL Site Narrative for Rose Hill Regional
Landfill
 
ROSE HILL REGIONAL LANDFILL
South Kingstown, Rhode Island
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Rose Hill Regional Landfill covers 70 acres in South
Kingstown, Washington County, Rhode Island. The landfill was operated by the town on land that it owned
or leased. Prior to its use as a landfill, the land was a sand and gravel operation. During 1967-83, domestic
and industrial wastes were disposed in three areas at the Rose Hill Regional Landfill: a solid waste landfill,
a bulky waste disposal area, and a sewage sludge landfill. The three disposal areas were closed in 1983,
partially capped with soil, and graded. A transfer station for municipal refuse is currently operated on-site.
 
On-site monitoring wells contain several volatile organic compounds, including trans-1,2-dichloroethylene,
chloroform, benzene, 1,1-dichloroethane, and xylenes, according to tests conducted by South Kingstown in
1982. Three private wells adjacent to the site are also contaminated with low levels of organic compounds,
as is on-site soil. An estimated 17,300 people obtain drinking water from wells within 3 miles of the site.
The population includes people served by the University of Rhode Island and the Kingstown District supply
wells.
 
In 1985, the Town of South Kingstown Utilities Department extended the municipal water line to nearby
residents with contaminated wells.
 
The site is on Rose Hill Road and is bordered by the Saugatucket River and residential areas. Mitchell
Brook flows through the site and joins the river. Saugatucket Pond, 2,000 feet downstream, is used for
fishing and swimming. A fresh water wetland is 500 feet downstream.
 
The site is not completely fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact
with hazardous substances.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has completed a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site and is investigating the possibility that those identified will conduct a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
EPA emergency staff has evaluated the site and determined that no removal action is warranted at this
time.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
