NPL Site Narrative for Rosen Brothers
Scrap Yard/Dump
 
ROSEN BROTHERS SCRAP YARD/DUMP
Cortland, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Rosen Brothers Scrap Yard/Dump covers approximately 20
acres adjacent to a residential/commercial area in Cortland, Cortland County, New York. The southern
border abuts Cortland City High School and is a natural route for students.
 
Wickwire Brothers, Inc., produced small metal items and disposed of industrial wastes on the site until
1970, when the facility burned to the ground. Philip and Harvey Rosen started a scrap metal processing
and waste disposal operation there in 1971, purchased the site in 1975, and stopped operations in 1985.
 
In 1972, 1984, and 1985, the Cortland County Health Department cited the Rosen brothers for violating
State and county laws concerning waste handling. On June 18, 1985, the department ordered Philip Rosen
to fence the property, forego burning or dumping, conduct daily inspections, plan for testing and removal
of all materials, and secure the pit. Rosen has not complied. Also, in 1985, a consultant to the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) found that a building and 150-foot smoke
stack were structurally unsound. Municipal waste, industrial waste, construction waste, timbers, and drums
had been disposed of in an unlined open dump approximately 100 feet long, 50 feet wide, and 15 to 20 feet
deep. The consultant estimated that approximately 500 drums, contents unknown and many leaking, were
on the surface. In addition, drums had been buried in two areas. Also on the surface were crushed cars
and refrigerators; 5,000-gallon steel tanks; approximately 10 fuel truck tanks; and an open pit containing
water with an oily surface.
 
In April 1986, NYSDEC's consultant detected 1,1-dichloroethylene, 1,1-dichloroethane, 1,1,1-
trichloroethane, and tetrachloroethylene in on-site wells; trace concentrations of trichloroethane, fluorene,
di-n-butyl phthalate, fluoranthene, pyrene, and di-n-octyl phthalate were also detected. Drums labeled with
some of these compounds were noted during the site inspection; other compounds detected are petroleum
constituents attributable to the car-crushing operation.
 
In September 1987, using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA fenced the site; secured and segregated
containers of hazardous materials; removed a number of gas cylinders; and sampled wastes. Cadmium,
chromium, lead, PCB-1242, chrysene, anthracene, phenanthrene, and pyrene were identified at the site
during the removal action. EPA anticipates conducting a second removal action involving the treatment
and/or disposal of the remaining hazardous materials.
 
The site overlies the Cortland-Homer-Premble Aquifer, a glacial outwash sand and gravel deposit. Public
and private wells tapping the aquifer within 3 miles of the site are the sole source of drinking water for an
estimated 24,000 people.
 
Perplexity Creek borders the site and discharges about 1.7 miles downstream to the Tioughnioga River,
which is used for recreational activities.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : On September 15, 1988, EPA issued a unilateral order under CERCLA Section
106(a) requiring Dallas Corp., Keystone Consolidated Industries, Inc., and Monarch Machine Tool Co. to
secure the site and transport hazardous wastes to an EPA-approved facility.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
