NPL Site Narrative for Ross Metals Inc.
 
ROSS METALS INC.
Rossville, Tennessee
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 1996) : Ross Metals Inc is located in Rossville, Fayette County, Tennessee.
The facility is bordered by a wetland to the north and northeast, a municipal wastewater treatment plant to
the west, the Southern Railroad tracks to the south, and residential property due east.
 
Ross Metals operated as a secondary lead smelter from 1978 until June 1992. Prior to Ross Metals Inc
ownership, the land was undisturbed. Ross Metals Inc received spent lead acid batteries, lead oxide, scrap
metal, and other lead waste and material from various business and industry, including battery crackers
and battery manufacturers. Processes included not only the smelting of lead and other scrap metals, but
a variety of other products such as crushed drums, limestone, steel, and cast iron, which were added to
create flux.
 
EPA Region 4 Environmental Services Division sampled Ross Metals Inc in November 1990. During this
investigation, surface water was sampled. Results indicated elevated levels of lead, barium, cadmium, and
zinc.
 
Two municipal wells, located within 0.25 mile, are used by the City of Rossville Water Department to serve
approximately 446 persons. The Kellogg Corporation also operates a food processing plant utilizing three
on-site wells within the 0.25-mile radius. These wells are used in production and serve approximately 300
employees. One well was sampled during an EPA investigation in June 1995. During this investigation site
attributable contaminants were detected in the sampled well. Several private potable wells are also located
within a 4-mile radius of the site.
 
History suggests that wastewater discharge, as well as waste run-off, was collected in the northeast portion
of the facility, and discharged into the wetland area north/northeast of the site. The wetland was sampled
during an EPA investigation in June 1995. During this investigation site attributable contaminants were
detected in the wetland north/northeast of the site.
 
Status (April 1997) : In September 1994, EPA began a removal action at the site. Approximately 4,400
gallons, 170 tons, and 1,700 cubic yards of waste were removed. An estimated 30,000 tons of slag remain
stockpiled in the various buildings on site. There are approximately 30,000-40,000 tons of landfilled
slag, contaminated soil, and sediment remaining on site and on adjacent properties. Lead is the primary
contaminant of concern. EPA is currently investigating the extent of contamination in the ground water,
surface water, soil, and sensitive environments on and near the facility that are known to have been
contaminated by facility operations.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
