NPL Site Narrative for Route 561 Dump
 
ROUTE 561 DUMP
Gibbsboro, New Jersey
 
 
Route 561 Dump is located on a vacant 2.9-acre parcel in a suburban area of Gibbsboro, Camden County,
New Jersey. The property is bounded by a strip mall to the north, Clement Lake to the east, Route 561
to the west, and vacant land to the south. The White Sand Branch (and its associated wetlands), which
originated at the outlet of Clement Lake, flows south through the site property. The stream, which loses
definition as it crosses the property, reforms toward the southern end of the property, and leaves the
site through a culvert that extends under Route 561. The site was previously used as a paint waste
dump. Operations of the plant, which was not located on the site property, included the manufacturing of
varnishes, lacquers, and paints, including dry colors, paste paints, and linseed oil liquid paints.
 
On February 8, 1994, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) conducted an
inspection of the site property, during which a greenish-blue particulate was found buried underneath
the ground surface. A blue-green material was also found on the ground surface and in the water of the
wetland located on the site property. In June 1994, the NJDEP collected four waste samples from the
dump area and three surface water samples from the White Sand Branch. Analysis of these samples
indicated the presence of numerous inorganic constituents.
 
In August 1995, an EPA contractor collected surface and subsurface soil samples from the site property as
well as sediment samples from the White Sand Branch. Analysis of these samples indicated the presence
of inorganic contaminants in the on-site soil and downstream sediment samples. Therefore, Level I
contamination of 0.13 mile of wetland frontage, as well as Level I contamination of a classified stream, was
documented based on the NJDEP and EPA sampling events.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
