NPL Site Narrative for Ruston Foundry
 
RUSTON FOUNDRY
Alexandria, Louisiana
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (January 1999) : Ruston Foundry is located at 1010 Bogan Street, Alexandria,
Rapides Parish, Louisiana. The city of Alexandria is located in the central portion of the state of Louisiana.
The Chatlin Lake Canal borders the facility on the north, east, and south and the former Missouri-Pacific
Railroad borders of the facility on the west. Residential areas are adjacent to the north, east, and south of
the property, across the Chatlin Lake Canal. An elementary school is located approximately 0.5 miles north
from the facility and a recreational park is located within 0.25 miles south. The property is accessible to the
public due to a missing front gate and damaged fencing.
 
The facility is an inactive and abandoned foundry situated on 4.6 acres of land. The facility began
operations in 1908 but has been inactive since 1985 due to adjudication by the Rapides Parish Tax
Assessor's office for unpaid taxes. The company engaged in foundry and machine shop activities and in
the manufacturing, prefabrication, and repair of articles of steel, iron, and other metals.
 
The Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ) conducted a site investigation in June
1990 and sampled soil and drums. Analysis of the soil samples revealed elevated concentrations of
lead. LDEQ referred the facility to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as a candidate for an
emergency response action. In November 1990 and April 1998, EPA inspected the facility and collected
soil, sediment, drum, and air samples from the facility property and the surrounding residential areas.
Elevated concentrations of hazardous substances were identified in several slag piles on and adjacent to
the facility property, an area of contaminated soil on the facility property, and an area of contaminated soil
in the residential areas east of the facility.
 
Hazardous substances detected at the site include arsenic, chromium, copper, lead, manganese, nickel,
and zinc. Releases of these hazardous substances have been documented to the soil and air surrounding
the facility. More than 9,000 people live within 1-mile of the facility, and more than 64,000 individuals live
within 4-miles of the facility.
 
Status (May 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
