NPL Site Narrative for Saco Municipal
Landfill
 
SACO MUNICIPAL LANDFILL
Saco, Maine
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Saco Municipal Landfill covers approximately 90 acres on
Foss Road in Saco, York County, Maine. The City of Saco has owned and operated the site since about
1960. Originally it was an open burning dump.
 
The site consists of four distinct disposal areas: Area 1 is a closed and capped municipal dump that
was used for open burning of household and industrial waste. Area 2 is an inactive industrial dump
that accepted bulk and demolition debris. Area 3 is an industrial dump that accepted wastes from local
industries, including Nike, Maremont, Garland, Lyn-Flex, and Lunder Shoe. Area 4 is an active landfill
that accepts household waste and tannery sludge containing chromium, other heavy metals, and volatile
organic compounds. The sludge was placed in unlined trenches, often directly in contact with ground
water, according to the city and EPA. Area 2 has a leachate collection system. There is no evidence of
liners or leachate systems in other disposal areas.
 
Water and sediment in Sandy Brook, which flows through the site, and ground water beneath the site
contain elevated levels of various metals and organic chemicals, according to tests conducted in 1974
by the State and the city's consultant. Approximately 700 people obtain drinking water from wells within 3
miles of the landfill.
 
On December 31, 1984, the City of Saco entered into a Consent Decree with the State in which the
city agreed to close the landfill. The city is investigating the site to determine the type and extent of
contamination. Based on this information, the city will close the landfill and begin cleanup.
 
The site is only partially fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with
hazardous substances.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : EPA is conducting a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site and will investigate the possibility of their performing a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination and identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
