NPL Site Narrative for Sacramento Army
Depot
 
SACRAMENTO ARMY DEPOT
Sacramento, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Sacramento Army Depot (SAAD) occupies 485 acres
within the city limits of Sacramento, Sacramento County, California, approximately 7 miles to the southeast
of the Sacramento business district. Morrison Creek enters the SAAD eastern boundary. The creek
parallels the depot perimeter to the south and discharges on the western boundary.
 
SAAD is a supply depot primarily responsible for the receipt, storage, issue, maintenance, and disposal
of various electronic materials. The primary sources of contamination at SAAD derive from metal-plating
operations and their associated waste waters and solid wastes. Generally, these wastes were discharged
to unlined sewage lagoons or burned and/or buried on the facility.
 
Ground water on and off the site is contaminated with trichloroethylene. Heavy metals above background
levels have been detected in on-site ground water and in sediment of Morrison Creek immediately
downstream of SAAD. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB) and SAAD have
been discussing additional monitoring of ground water and further investigations to define contaminated
areas.
 
SAAD is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search) and Phase II (preliminary survey).
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : SAAD is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the base and to identify alternatives for remedial action. EPA, CRWQCB,
and the California Department of Health Services will review the remedial investigation, as well as a
feasibility study for a water treatment plant on the base.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
