SAFETY LIGHT CORPORATION
Bloomsburg, Pennsylvania
Columbia County
11th Congressional District
 
Site Location/Size :
  Safety Light Corporation (SLC) is located in South Centre Township near Bloomsburg, Pennsylvania, in
Columbia County. The 1.5 acre SLC property is bounded on the north by Old Berwick Road, on the east
and west by residential areas, and on the south by the North Branch of the Susquehanna River.
 
Site History :
  Past and present activities at SLC include the manufacturing of self-illuminated watches and instrument
dials, smoke detectors, neutron sources, exit signs, and other merchandise containing radioactive
materials, as well as activities regulated under the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). SLC
activities have resulted in contamination of surface and subsurface soil, surface water (lagoons and the
Susquehanna River), sediment, and ground water. Analyses of ground water collected from nearby private
wells indicate the presence of radionuclides at concentrations elevated one or two standard deviations
above background conditions and threaten the area's drinking water.
 
Site Contamination/Contaminants :
  From the 1940s to the 1960s, manufacturing at the property used several radionuclides; radium was
the most widely used radionuclide at SLC. Prior to 1980, activities involving radium-226 and most other
radionuclides ceased, and tritium remained as the only radionuclide used in the manufacturing of self-
illuminating watch dials, instruments, and other products. Waste generated at SLC includes solid and liquid
wastestreams contaminated with radioactive materials, including radium, strontium, cesium, and tritium.
 
Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment :
  Ground water contamination as a result of activities at SLC have impacted drinking water wells located
within 4 miles of the facility, including four private drinking water wells and potentially 15 community and
nine nontransient noncommunity wells. These twenty-eight drinking water wells serve about 3,287 people.
Contaminant concentrations exceeding health-based benchmarks were found in four residential wells.
 
Response Activities (to date) :
  The SLC property currently is undergoing decommissioning. Decommissioning plans, cost estimates, and
characterization reports have been prepared to determine the remedial measures required to return the
property to unrestricted use. Based on the decommissioning cost estimates prepared, SLC is unable to
finance the decommissioning. NRC, the lead regulatory agency, is unable to conduct the decommissioning
necessary to return SLC to unrestricted use. Therefore, the NRC requested assistance from EPA Region 3
with cleanup of SLC through NPL listing.
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated
with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent
of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
