OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** July 2017 
SAINT -GOBAIN PERFORMACE PL ASTICS  Village of Hoosick Falls,  New York  
Rensselaer  County  
Site Location:
The Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics (SGPP) site  is located at 14 McCaffrey Street in the Village of Ho osick Falls, Rensselaer County, New York. The facility is situated in the southwest corner of Hoosick Falls and along the east side of the Hoosic River. 
 Site History: 
SGPP manufactures plastic materials, tapes, and foams and has operated in Hoosick Falls from 1999 to the present. The McCaffrey Street facility was originally built in 1961 and was used for manufactur ing extruded tapes, circuit board laminates, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)-coated fiberglass, and molded and extruded PTFE intermediates 
before SGPP began operations. The facility used perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)-containing materials in their manufacturing process until they began phasing them  out in 2003. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Ground water underlying the SGPP facility and withdrawn by the public supply wells for the Village of Hoosick Falls is contaminated with PFOA above the Health Advisory and with chlorinated solvents, such as trichloroethylene (TCE) and vinyl chloride. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The public supply wells in the Village of Hoosick Falls, which serve approximately 4, 000 people as the main source of drinking water, are contaminated with PFOA at concentrations above the EPA Health Advisory. In addition, PFOA has been found in several private wells.  
 Response Activities (to date): 
Saint-G obain Performance Plastics installed a carbon filtration system. Drinking water now meets all federal and state 
standards. 
 Need for NPL List ing: 
Ground water contaminated with PFOA in the public supply wells requires cleanup to protect human health and the environment. NPL listing has been determined to be the most effective approach for cleanup. The EPA received a letter of support for placing the site on the NPL from the s tate of New York. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The des cription may 
change as
 additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent 
FR n
otices.]  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure 
to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found 
on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp o r by telephone at 1-8 00-C DC-I NFO or 1 -800-2 32-4 636.
