 
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
  
OSWER/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2009 
SALFORD QUARRY Lower Salford Township, Pennsylvania Montgomery County 
Site Location: Salford Quarry is located at 610 Quarry Road in southeastern Pennsylvania. Site History: The 3-acre site was used as a shale quarry in the early 1900s. In the 1950s, the quarry was used as a dumping ground for industrial, commercial and residential waste.  In the 1960s, American Olean Tile Company used the quarry for the disposal of sludge, slurries, and fired and unfired scrap tiles from its nearby manufacturing plant.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: The contaminant of concern is boron, which has been found in the quarry soils and in ground water at elevated concentrations. Boron oxide is used as a tile glazing material.  Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: In 1991, several residential wells were found to be contaminated with boron.  Further investigation by EPA revealed elevated boron concentrations in additional residential wells. Response Activities (to date): In 1993, EPA installed a new municipal water line.  Initially, 73 residences were connected to public water. In 1994-1995, an additional 40 residences were connected. In 2007, EPA completed a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study at the site. Need for NPL Listing: Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not feasible at this time. EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
