OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** March 2008 
SAN GERMAN GROUND WATER San German, Puerto Rico CONTAMINATION 
àSite Location: The San German Ground Water Contamination site consists of a ground water plume with several potential sources of contamination.  The site is located in the municipality of San German, Puerto Rico. ´Site History: The San German Urbano public water system consists of seve n wells and two surface water intakes serving an estimated population of 25,000 people. Industrial activity in the area has c ontributed to contamination of these wells, one of which was ordered closed by the Puerto Rico De partment of Health (PRDOH) due to high levels of chemical solvents in the water. Other wells have shown lower levels of contamin ation during routine monitoring.  Nearby manufacturing facilities are believed to be sources of the contamination. rSite Contamination/Contaminants: The contaminants of concern are tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), and cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis-1,2- DCE). These chemicals are solvents used for degreasing, industrial cleaning, and dry cleaning.  vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: The drinking water supply for San German relies on local water sources.  The contaminated plume lies within a designated Wellhead Protection Area, indicating that the local ground water is a necessary component of the municipal drinking water supply. One well has already been taken out of service due to contamination; other wells are showing levels of contamination that require monitoring in order to protect public health.  3Response Activities (to date): In January 2007, EPA initiated an investigation of three locations  in San German which were identified as potential sources of contamination to the ground water plume.  Surface a nd subsurface soil samples and ground water samples were collected from the area.  As a result of this effort, potentia l sources of the ground water plume have been identified.  The PRDOH has taken action to protect human health by monitori ng the drinking water supply, and removing a contaminated well from the distribution system.  }Need for NPL Listing: The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico referred the site to EPA because industrial solvents have contaminated the drinking water supply for San German.  Other cleanup programs were eval uated but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
