NPL Site Narrative for San Gabriel Valley
(Area 3)
 
SAN GABRIEL VALLEY (AREA 3)
Alhambra, California
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : San Gabriel Valley (Area 3) is a ground water plume that runs
along the axis of the west fork of the Alhambra Creek in the San Gabriel ground water basin in Alhambra,
Los Angeles County, California. The plume is about 2 miles long and 1 mile wide.
 
Ground water is contaminated with trichloroethylene (TCE) and perchloroethylene (PCE), according to
analyses by State agencies and local water companies. Many public wells in the area exceed the EPA
Suggested No Adverse Response Levels (SNARL) for TCE and PCE. Approximately 100,000 people are
affected. Cities and public water companies in the area have tested to ensure that their water supplies
contain less than 5 parts billion (ppb) of TCE, a level considered safe for human consumption. When
alternative methods of reducing the TCE level below 5 ppb are not effective, wells are removed from
service.
 
Status (June 1984) : A supplemental sampling program of contaminated wells will begin soon to get a
"snapshot" view of the degree of contamination. The State Department of Health Services and EPA are
preparing to initiate a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the aerial and vertical extent of
contamination and to develop alternatives for treatment and management of the problem.
 
EPA continues its investigation to identify sources of the contamination.
 
This site, along with the three other San Gabriel Valley sites, was added to the NPL in May 1984 because
it involves a serious problem that required taking immediate remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
