NPL Site Narrative for San Gabriel Valley
(Area 1)
 
SAN GABRIEL VALLEY (AREA 1)
El Monte, California
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : San Gabriel Valley (Area 1) is a ground water plume that runs
along the axis of the Rio Hondo Wash and the Salt Pit Wash in the San Gabriel ground water basin in El
Monte, Los Angeles County, California. The plume also parallels the San Gabriel River to the east. It is
approximately 4 miles long and 1.5 miles wide.
 
Ground water is contaminated with trichloroethylene (TCE), perchloroethylene (PCE), and carbon
tetrachloride (CTC) according to analyses by State agencies and local water companies. Many public
wells in this area exceed the EPA Suggested No Adverse Response Levels (SNARL) for TCE and PCE.
Approximately 200,000 people are affected. Cities and public water companies in the area have tested to
ensure that their water supplies contain less than 5 parts per billion (ppb) of TCE and 4 ppb PCE, levels
considered safe for human consumption. When alternative methods of reducing the TCE and PCE levels
below such levels are not effective, wells are removed from service.
 
Currently, three small mutual water companies have no alternate water supply and have advised their
customers to use bottled water.
 
Status (June 1984) : As a result of EPA's analysis of initial remedial measures, completed in December
1983, EPA will install water treatment systems to provide clean water to two of the three companies that
have no alternate supply. The third company has already purchased a treatment system and will begin
operation of the system soon.
 
A supplemental sampling program of contaminated wells will begin soon to get a "snapshot" view of the
degree of contamination. The State Department of Health Services and EPA are preparing to initiate a
remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the aerial and vertical extent of contamination and to
develop alternatives for treatment and management of the problem.
 
EPA continues its investigation to identify sources of contamination.
 
This site, along with the three other San Gabriel Valley sites, was added to the NPL in May 1984 because
it involves a serious problem that required taking immediate remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
