 
 
OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch  Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2005 
SANDY  BEACH  ROAD  
GROUND WATER PLUMEAzle, Texas 
Tarrant  County 12th Congressional District 
 
à Site Location/Size: 
The Sandy Beach Road Ground Water Plume site is situated in Tarrant County, in and around the cities of Azle and Pelican Bay, northwest of Fort Worth, Texas. The site cons ists of a trichloroethene (TCE) contaminated ground water plume originating from an unidentified source. The plume enco mpasses an area that is approximately one-half mile wide by one mile long. The plume is centered in a rural residentia l area with some light industry, along Sandy Beach Road at the intersection of Allison Avenue. 
 
´ Site History: 
In March 2004, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) brought the site to EP A for investigation.  In June 2004, TCEQ conducted investigations at the site under a grant from EPA Region 6. The investigations identified TCE in three public water supply wells and 12 residential drinking water wells.  
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The contaminated ground water plume originates from  unidentified sources and contains TCE; cis-1,2- dichloroethylene; MTBE; trans 1,2-dichloroethene; 1,1 dichlo roethene; and 1,1 dichloroethane. The plume is located within a residential area in the cities of Azle and  Pelican Bay and has affected three public water supply wells and as many as 12 residential drinking water wells. Two of the municipa l supply wells and nine of the residential wells had TCE concentrations above the accepted health-based level for TCE. 
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
The contaminated aquifer and drinking well water have been  the only source of water for these residents, who have been drinking the water as well as using it for other consumptive purposes for an indeterminate period of time. The predominant threat to human populations is the ingestion of TCE-contaminated drinking water and the potential for exposure by inhalation of TCE vapors. The City of Pelican Bay supplies potable water to approximately 1,500 residents. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
Exposure to the contamination has been temporarily mitigat ed due to the installation of filtration systems on the contaminated residential wells.  EPA provi ded bottled drinking water to the affected residents until the filtration units were installed and proved to be fully working. TCEQ and EPA also urged residents not to use the contaminated well water and to ventilate their homes during any use of heated water such as when washing dishes or showering. The City of Pelican Bay temporarily closed the contaminated public water wells and is using the remaining wells completed in a deeper aquifer unaffected by the contamination to supply water to local residents. 
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination.  See 56 FR 5600,  February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
 For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs.  ATSDR ToxFAQs can  be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
