NPL Site Narrative for Sand Springs
Petrochemical Complex
 
SAND SPRINGS PETROCHEMICAL COMPLEX
Sand Springs, Oklahoma
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 8, 1983) : The Sand Springs Petrochemical Complex covers about
235 acres in Sand Springs, Tulsa County, Oklahoma, adjacent to the Arkansas River. The site consists
of all the former Sinclair Oil Refinery south of Adams Road, including the Wynn area and the old Sinclair
refinery acid pits. The Wynn area is a waste oil and spent solvents recycling, storage, and disposal facility
covering about 6 acres adjacent to the Arkansas River levee. Groups of operators are involved in the Wynn
area: (1) the Wynn Group (various companies, but chiefly Vacuum & Pressure Tank Truck Services, Inc.)
and (2) the Recyclon Group (Recyclon Corp., Resource Recovery & Refining Corp., and various individuals
who control and operate those entities).
 
The acid pits date to when the refinery was in operation (1930-1944). Several thousand cubic yards of
sulfuric acid sludge containing heavy metals, including lead and chromium, are stored in two unlined
pits, perhaps as deep as 20 feet. Over the years, sludge seeped into the Arkansas River levee, releasing
contaminants to the river. The pits probably also contaminate ground water.
 
Several additional industries leased portions of the refinery property. Hazardous substances were stored
or disposed of in drums, tanks, and unlined pits, or were simply buried on-site. These substances include
volatile and nonvolatile organics, acids, caustics, chlorinated solvents, and sludges containing heavy
metals. Poor operations have contaminated local ground water, according to EPA tests, and there is the
potential for contaminants to leave the site in run-off.
 
Status (June 1984) : EPA and the State are preparing a cooperative agreement for a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and to identify
alternatives for remedial action. EPA issued two Administrative Orders concerning an immediate removal
in the Wynn area. The orders were issued on March 2 and March 13, 1984, to Recyclon Corp., Resource
Recovery & Refining Corp., Vacuum & Pressure Tank Truck Services, Inc., Vacuum Refining, Inc.,
Solvents Recovery, Inc., Sand Springs Home, Inc., and certain individuals who control and operate or are
involved with these entities. In the immediate removal, EPA removed and disposed of approximately 400
drums of hazardous substances, repaired a fence, and sampled and analyzed the pits, on-site soil, and on-
site monitoring wells. Further action may be required depending upon sampling results from the remedial
investigation.
 
Because appropriate scoring documents were not in the public docket and so not available during the
comment period, EPA is providing an additional comment period for this site.
 
Status (January 1986) : On-site sampling under the cooperative agreement began in May 1985. The
Oklahoma State Department of Health is overseeing the drilling activities. The Tulsa City County Health
Department will sample air, surface water, and sediments through September 1986.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : No comments were received during the additional comment period. Hence, EPA
is adding the Sand Springs Petrochemical Complex to the NPL.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
