 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2010 
SANFORD DRY CLEANERS  Sanford, Florida  
 Seminole  County  
 
 Site Location: 
The site is located on South Palmetto Avenue in Sanford, Seminole County, Florida.  There are two contiguous properties totaling approximately 1 acre in the historic section of downtown Sanford.  Buildings occupy the majority of both of thes e properties.  Lake Monroe is ½
 mile to the north.  
 Site History: 
Downtown Dry Cleaners and Laundry was established on the 121 South Palmet to Avenue property in the 1940s.  In 1964, the business expanded onto 113 South Palmetto Avenue , and in the 1970s, the properties were sold and business operations continued under the name of Sanford Dry C leaners.  Dry cleaning operations continued until 2 001.   
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Tetrachloroethene (PCE) and its biodegradation products, such as trichloroethene (TCE), were found in the soil and ground water at the site.  PCE, TCE and cis-1,2 dichloroethene (DCE) were found in shallow and deep ground water samples from the surficial aquifer at concentrations above the EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs).  The highest levels of total volatile organic compounds (VOCs) were found in the shallow and deep ground water wells near the back door of the building on 121 South Palmetto Avenue.  Up-gradient ground water sample results confirm that the VOC-contaminated plume originates at the site.  Ground water samples from a well 150 feet to the northeast of the site contained PCE breakdown products, some at concentrations above the ir MCLs.   
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Ground water is contaminated with volatile organic compounds at concentrations above drinking water standards.  Contamination was found in the surficial aquifer at 15 feet and 35 to 45 feet below land surface.  The Floridan aquifer, which contains the potable drinking water, is about 80 to 90 feet below land surface .  There are nearly 50,000 people served by the 15 municipal supply wells within 4 miles of the site.  There is a risk to human health from the ground water migration pathway and contamination of public drinking water.  
 
 Response Activities (to date): 
There have been no cleanup activities done at the site to date.   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of Florida referred the site to EPA.  Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated , but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the s tate. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency f or Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.
 
