NPL Site Narrative for Sangamo Electric
Dump/Crab Orchard National Wildlife
Refuge (USDOI)
 
SANGAMO ELECTRIC DUMP/CRAB ORCHARD NATIONAL
WILDLIFE REFUGE (USDOI)
Carterville, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Sangamo Electric Dump/Crab Orchard National Wildlife
Refuge Site covers 2 to 3 acres in Carterville, Williamson County, Illinois. The U.S. Department of Interior
(USDOI) owns the property. From 1946 to the mid-1960s, Sangamo Electric buried by-products from the
manufacturing of electrical components and capacitors in a landfill that is close to and drains into Crab
Orchard Lake. Soil samples from the edge of the landfill contain PCBs in the range of 12,000 parts per
million (ppm) and lead in the range of 7,000 ppm, according to analyses conducted by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service. Soil samples collected between the fill and the lake showed lower concentrations. These
contaminants are migrating via surface run-off into Crab Orchard Lake, from which the City of Marion
(population 1,400) takes water during periods of peak demand.
 
At the request of EPA, USDOI is planning a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the extent
of the contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The contractor for Sangamo and USDOI prepared a scope of work for the remedial
investigation/feasibility study, which EPA has reviewed. The study is in progress. Sangamo has agreed to
pay for cleanup of the site, while USDOI will handle the off-site study.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
