 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs ca n be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** March 2012 
SAUER DUMP  Dundalk , Maryland  
 Baltimore County  
 
 Site Location: 
The 2.48-acre site is located in the Dundalk area of Baltimore, Maryland.  It is bordered by a cove of the Back River, tidal wetlands to the south, and non-tidal wetland areas along the northwestern, southwestern and southeastern borders. The Back River is a tributary to the Chesapeake Bay.  
 
 Site History: 
The property is an inactive, privately owned, unpermitted, former dump. The property was originally a marshland that was filled and stabilized by a past owner. During dump operations from the 1960s through the1980s, hazardous substances were  improperly stored and disposed of on the property. The current property owner is Wittstadt Hunting Club, Inc.  Current operations include vehicle maintenance and storage. All -terrain vehicles have been used on the property,  causing erosion and exposing contaminated soils.  
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The main source on the site is contaminated soils which cover most of the 2.48 -acre property. Wastes observed on the property during site investigations included drums, storage tanks, salvage items such as scrap metal, empty tanks, abandoned trucks, tractor-truck trailers, open roll-off containers, heavy construction equipment, and junked cars.  Charred areas and burned paint waste have also been observed. Studies conducted at the property found that  concentrations of semivolatile organic compounds (SVOCs), metals, polychlorinated b iphenyls (PCBs), and pesticides in the soil and sediment are present at elevated levels.  
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The property is zoned as a Resource Conservation Critical Area under the state Critical Area Act.  The Critical Area Act recognizes that the land immediately surrounding the Bays and their tributaries has the greatest potential to affect water quality and wildlife habitat and thus designat es all lands within 1,000 feet of tidal waters or adjacent tidal wetlands as “Critical Area.” The Back River is also heavily used for recreational fishing and is an important habitat for many species of fish and shellfish in the area. 
 
 Response Activities (to date): 
In 2005, the responsible parties constructed a fence around the former dump area to prevent access to most of the property  and installed plastic sheeting over contaminated areas . The shoreline has also been stabilized in areas where erosion was significant.   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of Maryland referred the site to the EPA because of the need for a comprehensive cleanup. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the s tate.   
