NPL Site Narrative for Sauk County
Landfill
 
SAUK COUNTY LANDFILL
Excelsior, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Sauk County formerly operated a 10-acre landfill in Excelsior, a
rural agricultural area 10 miles west of Baraboo, Sauk County, Wisconsin. In 1973, Sauk County received
a permit from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources to accept municipal waste. During 1973-83,
contractors hauled in municipal wastes from several small municipalities and placed them on naturally
occurring sand overlying sandstone bedrock.
 
The landfill also accepted foundry wastes from Grede Foundry, Inc., according to information Sauk County
provided to EPA as required by CERCLA Section 103(c). Foundry sand formed the berms of the landfill.
Approximately 2 percent of the wastes were cupola baghouse dusts, which contain lead and cadmium.
When the landfill closed in 1983, clay was placed on its top and sides.
 
Volatile organic compounds, including toluene, benzene, 2-butanone, 1,1-dichloroethylene, and 1,1-
dichloroethane, as well as arsenic, barium, and chromium, are present in on-site monitoring wells,
according to tests conducted by EPA in 1985. Approximately 900 persons obtain drinking water from
private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
During an inspection conducted in 1985, EPA found that methane was being generated at the site.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : The State is investigating the possibility that the county will conduct a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
