NPL Site Narrative for Savanna Army
Depot Activity
 
SAVANNA ARMY DEPOT ACTIVITY
Savanna, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Savanna Army Depot Activity (SADA) is an Army
munitions installation occupying more than 13,000 acres north of Savanna, in Carroll County in
northwestern Illinois, on the east banks of the Mississippi River. The facility has handled, processed, and
stored munitions, explosives, and industrial chemicals since operations began in 1918. Renovation and
loading of artillery shells and bombs began at SADA in the 1930s and has occurred intermittently. Several
areas of the facility have been used for the demolition and burning of obsolete ordnance.
 
The Army has detected munitions-related contaminants, primarily trinitroluene (TNT), in surface soils and
ground water on the base. The volume of contaminated ground water is unknown.
 
SADA is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this program,
the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from hazardous
materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search) and Phase II (preliminary survey). Phase III
(engineering analysis of alternative remedial measures) is underway.
 
Status (April 1987) : Phase III was completed in November 1984. The Department of Defense will meet
with the State and EPA to discuss alternatives for remedial action. The Army has decided to incinerate
TNT-contaminated soils.
 
Status (March 13, 1989) : EPA, the State, and the Army are negotiating an Interagency Agreement under
CERCLA Section 120 for further cleanup activities at the site.
 
This site was reproposed on July 22, 1987 to be consistent with EPA's proposed policy for placing on the
NPL sites located on Federally owned or operated facilities subject to the corrective action authorities
of Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). EPA solicited comments on the
Hazard Ranking System score for the site, which includes areas subject to RCRA Subtitle C corrective
action authorities. EPA has finalized the NPL/RCRA policy for Federal facility sites and is placing this site
on the NPL under the policy.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
