  
 OLEM/OSRTI  
Washington, DC 20460  
 N ATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)   
***NPL Site*** November 2019 
SCHROUD PROPERTY  Chicago, Illinois  
 Cook County  
 Site Location: The Schroud Property site was used for disposal of slag from nearby steel manufacturers and consists of a large, 
 
unmaintained waste disposal area approximately 67 acres in  size.   Site History: The Schroud Property site was formerly used to store and dump slag mat erial from Republic/LTV Steel, which was 
 
located approximately one-mile north of the Schroud Property site. Slag dumping is estimated to have occurred from 1951 to 1977 and may have continued after purchase of the Republic Steel site in the early 1980s.   Site Contamination/Contaminants:  Soil/waste on the site is contaminated with lead, chromium and other inorganic compounds exceeding health- based 
 
benchmark levels. These chemicals were also found exceeding ecological screening values in sediments from I ndian Creek, a perennial stream which flows west -northwesterly from Wolf Lake to the Calumet River along the northern end of the Schroud Property site. Slag was also visible in the creek.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  Runoff from the site has contaminated Indian Creek and adjacent wetlands. Fish and other aquatic wildlife live in Indian 
 
Creek. The site is not fenced and people may be directly exposed to contamination due to heavy recreational use of the site by trespassers.   Response Activities (to date): The city of Chicago recently placed barriers and warning signs around parts of the site to discourage access. 
 
  Need for NPL Listing: The state of Illinois referred the site to the EPA because the site was unmaintained. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but were not pursued because of the lack of a viable, cooperative responsible party to implement an investigation or perform clean up. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the  NPL from the state of Illinois. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notic es]  For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
