NPL Site Narrative for Scovill Industrial
Landfill
 
SCOVILL INDUSTRIAL LANDFILL
Waterbury, Connecticut
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (May 11, 2000) : The Scovill Industrial Landfill is located north of Meriden Road in
Waterbury, New Haven County, Connecticut. According to the Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection, the Scovill Manufacturing Company used this area as a landfill from 1919 to the mid-1970s for
disposal of ash, cinders, demolition debris, and other wastes generated by the facility. Before 1919, this
area was part of a 30-acre parcel owned by Daniel J. McCarthy and consisted of undeveloped woodlands
and wetland areas, with Carrington Brook flowing through the site from north to south. The parcel of land
was sold to the Scovill Manufacturing Company on June 25, 1919.
 
The landfilling operations began along Meriden Road and slowly moved northward. Around 1941, when
landfilling was complete along the southeast portion of the site, the company began subdividing and selling
parcels of the site for development. As the wetlands and stream valley were filled, additional parcels were
subdivided and sold to developers. Most of this development occurred over a 20-year period beginning
in the mid-1950s and ending in the mid-1970s. By the mid-1990s, 12 acres of the 19-acre area had been
developed into residential and commercial properties. The buildings currently on the site are two- and
three-story residential structures and small commercial buildings, including a landscaping firm, adult
daycare facility, social club, department store, cab service, medical office, car repair shop, and a shopping
plaza.
 
The northern portion of the site is an undeveloped 6.8-acre parcel, referred to as the Calabrese parcel.
This parcel was in the initial stages of development for a proposed elderly housing complex when industrial
wastes were encountered during the excavation of soil for the concrete footings. The construction project
was ordered to stop until the extent and degree of contamination was identified. EPA conducted sampling
on April 26, 1999 through April 28, 1999 and collected soil samples from the site and surrounding area.
Soil samples showed elevated levels of organic chemicals such as acenaphthene, flourene, anthracene,
and chrysene; metals such as cadmium, nickel, silver, and zinc; and PCBs. The Calabrese parcel has
since been fenced and posted, along with a temporary cap placed over the disturbed areas.
 
Status (July 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
