NPL Site Narrative for Sealand Limited
 
SEALAND LIMITED
Mount Pleasant, Delaware
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Sealand Limited Site occupies approximately 2 acres
in Mount Pleasant, New Castle County, Delaware. The area is primarily agricultural and residential.
Operations began in 1971 when Adams Laboratory rented the property from Conrail, Inc., to operate a
rendering plant. In 1979, Conrail reportedly cleaned up the property after Adams Laboratory abandoned
the rendering plant. The property remained vacant until September 1982, when Steve and Wayne Hawkins
rented it from Conrail. From then until August 1983, they operated a creosote manufacturing plant under
the name Sealand Limited and Oil Industry. In addition, the facility accepted coal tar, gas tar, and ink
oil wastes, allegedly to be recycled. Instead, they were stored on-site in tanks and drums. When the
Hawkinses abandoned the facility in 1983, it contained 22 storage tanks, a boiler house, mixing chambers,
pressure vessels, several hundred 55-gallon drums containing assorted creosol intermediates, and a
10,000-gallon wooden storage tank.
 
A 1983 investigation by the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control
(DDNREC) revealed that the wooden tank and numerous drums were leaking. Analyses of tanks, drums,
and soil on- and off-site detected polynuclear aromatic compounds, creosols, solvents, and other toxic
organic compounds.
 
In December 1983, in response to the imminent threat to human health, EPA used CERCLA emergency
funds to remove 240,800 gallons of coal tar, 320 drums, and 80 cubic yards of solid waste. The hazardous
materials were transported to a facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act. EPA also cleaned the storage tanks and capped the site with a layer of clay.
 
Nickel and acenaphthalene were present in an on-site monitoring well in EPA and DDNREC analyses
conducted in 1984. Soils on the site are permeable and ground water shallow (5 feet in some cases),
conditions that facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water. Private wells within 3 miles of the
site provide drinking water to an estimated 135 people.
 
Joy Run is adjacent to the site and flows into the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal, which is used for
recreational activities.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : Under an Administrative Order on Consent effective in December 1988, 15
parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site are conducting a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action. The work is scheduled to be completed early in 1991. In January 1990, EPA completed an
action to recover funds spent on the removal action from potentially responsible parties.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
