NPL Site Narrative for Sealand
Restoration, Inc.
 
SEALAND RESTORATION, INC.
Lisbon, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 26, 1989) : The Sealand Restoration, Inc., Site occupies approximately
200 acres south of Pray Road in Lisbon, St. Lawrence County, New York. The surrounding area, consisting
largely of farmland and wetlands, is sparsely populated. In the late 1970s, the company, also known
as Sealand Industrial Services, Inc., disposed of waste oils and oil spill debris under a permit issued by
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC). In addition, wastes were
accepted from numerous industrial plants in central and northern New York State. Wastes were stored or
disposed of in three on-site facilities: a drum storage area, a disposal pit, and a land spreading area. In
1980, NYSDEC ordered the company to stop waste disposal activities.
 
In 1980, the New York State Department of Health found low levels of cadmium in residential wells near
the site. Under a Consent Order Agreement in 1981, Sealand Restoration agreed to clean up the site;
however, the firm was subsequently cited for noncompliance. The site has been referred to the State
Attorney General. According to NYSDEC, St. Lawrence County received a $100,000 Local Assistance
Grant in 1984 from the New York State Legislature to perform limited cleanup at the site. The county
removed 133 drums left on the surface, along with 60 full or partially full buried drums, 42 empty buried
drums, and 150 cubic yards of contaminated soil. These wastes were transported to a hazardous waste
facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
Acetone, trichloroethane, toluene, benzene, and trichloroethylene were present in on-site monitoring wells
downgradient of the landfill, according to tests conducted in 1986-87 by a consultant to NYSDEC. An
estimated 1,100 people obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site, one of which is
on the site. The on-site well has been taken out of service.
 
Trichloroethane and tetrachloroethylene were detected in surface water downhill from the site in tests
conducted by the State (1980) and EPA (1985). A fresh water wetland lies within and adjacent to the site.
The area is used for recreational activities.
 
NYSDEC has conducted a study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site. The study
determined that surface soils in the land spreading area contain low levels of PCBs and heavy metals, and
that contaminants may have migrated downward in soils beneath where the drums had been stacked. The
shallow aquifer is contaminated downgradient of the disposal pit. Possible interconnection with a deeper
aquifer must be assessed.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In March 1990, NYSDEC excavated approximately 800 tons of contaminated
soils and 1,500 drums of wastes and transported the materials to a hazardous waste disposal facility
regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The excavated area remains
to be seeded and graded.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
