NPL Site Narrative for Seymour Recycling
Corp.
 
SEYMOUR RECYCLING CORP.
Seymour, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Seymour Recycling Corp. Site occupies nearly 14 acres
in an industrial park, 2 miles from the center of Seymour, Indiana. The facility, now abandoned, once
reclaimed industrial wastes. Operations began in 1969, when the Seymour Manufacturing Co. moved its
Chemical Division to land it leased in the industrial park. In 1976, the Chemical Division was incorporated
into Seymour Recycling Corp., under the ownership of Seymour Manufacturing. In 1978, the site was sold
to Environmental Processing Corp. Because of numerous permit violations, the State closed the site in
February 1980. Remaining on-site were about 60,000 drums and 98 bulk storage tanks containing wastes
such as solvents, phenols, cyanides, acids, and C-56 (a pesticide by-product), as well as hundreds of
small containers of hazardous materials, primarily from laboratory operations. Some wastes were highly
explosive. Soil and ground water off-site are contaminated.
 
EPA undertook emergency actions beginning in March 1980, using $2 million made available under
Section 311 of the Clean Water Act. The actions included: installation of a dike around the site; installation
of a carbon unit to treat surface water on-site; sampling and testing of drums, tanks, soil, and water;
restaging of approximately 45,000 drums to more secure areas; installation of security fencing; cleanup of
a spill of 3,000 gallons of chromic acid; and removal of liquids from the bulk storage tanks. During this time,
two waste generators removed wastes from the site.
 
In May 1980, the Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, brought a Federal civil action seeking injunctive
relief against parties responsible for wastes associated with this site.
 
This is the top priority site in Indiana.
 
Status (July 1983) : In August 1982, EPA signed a $12,000 Superfund State contract with Indiana for initial
remedial measures involving upgrading and repairing of the on-site system for treating surface water.
 
In October 1982, EPA negotiated a $7.7 million agreement with 24 generators to undertake a complete
surface cleanup at the site. The cleanup is scheduled to be completed in the fourth quarter of 1983. An
additional group of generators has committed over $4 million to a "cash-out" settlement agreement to the
cleanup.
 
Suit will be brought by the end of 1983 against a group of parties who have not settled. Also, EPA is
planning a remedial investigation to determine the extent and type of subsurface contamination at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
