OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May 2019 
SHAFFER  EQUIPMENT/ARBUCKLE   
CREEK  AREA  Minden, West Virginia  
Fayette  County  
Site Location:
The Shaffer Equipment/Arbuckle Creek Area site is located in Minden, a former coal town in Appalachia, which currently has a population of around 250 persons . 
 Site History: 
Sediment and soils are contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) which were used by the Shaffer Equipment Company in the manufacture of electrical substations for the local coal mining industry. The company stored nonessential, damaged or outdated transformers and capacitors on the site property. The equipment leaked coolant and lubricants containing PCBs into onsite soils and into nea rby Arbuckle Creek. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The site consists of PCB-contaminated sediments in Arbuckle Creek which have spread to residential properties due to frequent flooding in the area. Activities which occurred at the former Shaffer Equipment property are one of the main sources of contamination. There may also be other potential sources of PCBs in the area from former mining operations. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Arbuckle Creek sediments are contaminat ed with PCBs which have spread to residential yards due to frequent flooding. Elevated levels of PCBs have been found up to one mile downstream in Arbuckle Creek. Wetlands along the creek and endangered species’ habitats are also contaminated. In addition,  the creek flows into the New River Gorge National River which is used extensively for recreation and fishing. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
During the period from 1984 to 1991, the EPA performed two contaminated soil removal actions at Shaffer Equipment. In 1997, the EPA was notified of a fire at the remaining building on the Shaffer property that contained materials with PCBs. The EPA conducted another assessment and contracted the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) to design a cap for the remaining contaminated soils and building debris. The USACE completed the construction of the cap in 2002. 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of West Virginia referred the site to the EPA because of the risk to residents and those who use the creek and river for fishing or other recreational purposes. There are also contaminated wetlands in the Minden neighborhood. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notic es] For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800 -CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
