NPL Site Narrative for Sharpe Army Depot
 
SHARPE ARMY DEPOT
Lathrop, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Sharpe Army Depot covers 724 acres in a primarily rural
area of San Joaquin County in north-central California, approximately 60 miles east of San Francisco, 2
miles east of the San Joaquin River, and 1.5 miles northeast of Lathrop.
 
The site is a former U.S. Army maintenance facility. Wastes produced on-site were disposed of in multiple
locations, including the South Balloon Area, the Burning Pits Area, and the North Balloon Area. These
areas cover about 0.5 square mile. The wastes disposed of at the depot include sludge containing phenols
and polychlorinated hydrocarbons (trans-dichloroethylene, trichloroethylene, carbon tetrachloride), and
used paints and solvents. The total amounts and types are unknown. The wastes have contaminated both
soil and ground water, but not surface water to date. All maintenance activities have ceased, and the waste
areas are no longer used.
 
The site is located in the large plain on the valley floor, which carries several aquifers, at least one artesian.
Most of the surrounding land is used for agriculture, primarily for raising row crops.
 
The depot is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search) of the IRP.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Sharpe Army Depot is sampling on-base and off-base ground water under IRP
Phase II-Stage 2 (confirmatory sampling). The Army has installed a facility for treating contaminated
ground water in the South Balloon Area.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). However, no such areas were
included in scoring this specific site. Therefore, this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal
section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
