NPL Site Narrative for Sheller-Globe Corp.
Disposal
 
SHELLER-GLOBE CORP. DISPOSAL
Keokuk, Iowa
 
 
Conditions at proposal (May 5, 1989) : Sheller-Globe Corp. operated an industrial landfill and solvent
burning area in Lee County 4 miles north of Keokuk, Iowa, from 1948 to 1972. The 5-acre site is in a
heavily wooded, rural area. The land was filled in and sold in 1973 to an individual who built a home on the
site and draws water from an on-site well.
 
Sheller-Globe Corp. manufactured rubber products, including automobile weather stripping, at a facility
adjacent to the disposal area. Liquids and sludges from the operation were deposited directly into a ravine
with no system for diverting surface run-off. Among wastes deposited, according to the company, were
at least 1,000 drums of paint sludge, methylene chloride, toluene diisocyanates, methyl ethyl ketone,
isopropyl alcohol, butyl alcohol, and resins containing fluorocarbons. Solvents were periodically burned in
the open.
 
In December 1987 tests, EPA detected arsenic, chromium, lead, mercury, nickel, zinc, benzene, and
toluene in on-site soil, ground water, and surface water. An estimated 1,125 people obtain drinking water
from private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
In December 1987, EPA also observed seepage and an oil sheen on an intermittent stream near the
northeast edge of the site. The Mississippi River 2.8 miles downstream of the site is used for recreational
boating and fishing.
 
In March 1988, EPA observed 52 drums on the surface, as well as scrap rubber and polyurethane foam.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
