OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
*** Final Site*** March 2008 
SHERWIN-WILLIAMS/HILLIARDS CREEK Gibbsboro, New Jersey Camden County 
àSite Location: The Sherwin-Williams/Hilliards Creek site is located in Gibbsboro, Camden County, New Jersey, and includes soil and ground water contamination associated with the former Lucas Paint Works Plant (Lucas Plant) and contaminated soil and sediment associated with Hilliards Creek.  The environmental issues with Hilliards Creek have resulted in residential properties becoming contaminated.  ´Site History: The Lucas Plant operated from 1849 to 1976. The Lucas plant manufactured primarily white lead paints, varnishes, and lacquer. The plant was owned by John Lucas Company (Lucas) from 1849 to approximately 1930, when Sherwin-Williams acquired control of Lucas. In 1981, the former Lucas Plant property was sold and developed into a light industrial complex.  Many of the structures, such as aboveground storage tanks, were removed from the property when the industrial park was developed. rSite Contamination/Contaminants: While the current owner was developing the property, several contaminated ground water seeps were identified. Investigations into the source of the ground water seeps identified a ground water plume that contained levels of hazardous substances underlying the former Lucas Plant, areas of contaminated soil surrounding former structures on the plant such as above ground storage tanks and buildings, and soil contamination in the area of the surface impoundments. The contamination includes volatile organic compounds, semivolatile organic compounds, and metals, primarily lead. vPotential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Samples of soil and sediment collected from Hilliards Creek revealed the presence of lead-contaminated soil in the creek’s flood plain including residential property, and lead-c ontaminated sediment in the creek for a distance of approximately 4,200 feet. Lead-contaminated sediments also  have been documented in wetlands associated with Hilliards Creek. Hilliards Creek flows through residential areas and the Gibbsboro Nature Preserve. The preserve includes walking trails for area residents. Lead contamination is present in sediment in the area of the preserve. 3Response Activities (to date): A fence has been constructed around areas of lead-contaminated sediment and soil in Hilliards Creek to prevent contact with lead-contaminated soil.  Lead-contaminated soil also has been removed from one residential property. Sherwin-Williams has conducted numerous cleanup actions at the former plant site. }Need for NPL Listing: The State of New Jersey referred the site to EPA in order to  complete a comprehensive extent of contamination study and investigate cleanup options. Though numerous actions have ta ken place to date, groundwater at the plant site, and residential properties remain contaminated. Other cleanup program s were evaluated but are not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
