NPL Site Narrative for Sheridan Disposal
Services
 
SHERIDAN DISPOSAL SERVICES
Hempstead, Texas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Sheridan Disposal Services Site is approximately 9 miles
north-northeast of Hempstead in a largely agricultural area of Waller County, Texas. On the site are a 42-
acre land evaporation system, a 12- to 22-acre surface impoundment (depending on water levels), an
incinerator, and nine storage tanks. The company collected a wide range of petrochemical and general
industrial wastes from Gulf Coast industries, starting in the late 1950s. The State ordered the surface
impoundment closed in 1976. In response, the facility constructed the evaporation system for treatment of
accumulated rainwater and covered approximately 7 acres of the impoundment with construction debris
and soil. By 1984, the State concluded that Sheridan Disposal Service lacked technical and financial
resources to adequately close the site and revoked its waste disposal permit.
 
There is potential for water to move between the water-table aquifer and the first confined aquifer below.
The upper aquifer is contaminated with chloroform, dichlorobromomethane, and isophorone, according to
limited data collected by EPA and parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site. The
extent of contamination of both aquifers is being studied in an ongoing remedial investigation of ground
water. The deeper aquifer provides drinking water for approximately 500 people within 3 miles of the site.
 
The site is in alluvial deposits about 250 feet from the Brazos River, within the 100-year floodplain.
Elevated levels of metals were found in sediments downstream of the site. Metals or organics above
upstream levels were not found in the surface water. A water overflow from the site in 1978 caused a fish
kill in Clark Lake, a private lake adjacent to the site. Recent EPA air testing found no toxic compounds
above background levels.
 
In April 1984, approximately 60 potentially responsible parties set up the Sheridan Site Committee.
It began negotiating with the State and EPA and hired a contractor to investigate ground water. The
Committee has also taken these actions: transferred 1.5 million gallons of water from the impoundment
to the evaporation system; repaired, strengthened, and raised dikes around the impoundment and the
evaporation system to above the 100-year floodplain; and transferred 6,000 gallons of oil floating on top of
the impoundment to on-site tanks.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : On February 3, 1987, the Sheridan Site Committee entered into an
Administrative Order on Consent with EPA under Section 106 of CERCLA and Section 7003 of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to control
the source and migration of contaminated ground water from the site. Tests conducted in 1987 identified
benzene, tetrachloroethylene, and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene in the water-table aquifer. The lower aquifer
had no contaminants above detection limits.
 
Under a unilateral order issued by EPA in 1987, eight potentially responsible parties lowered the water
level in the pond.
 
The Committee's Source Control Risk Assessment/Feasibility Study and Remedial Investigation for
management of ground water migration were recently finalized.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
