NPL Site Narrative for Shpack Landfill
 
SHPACK LANDFILL
Attleboro, Norton, Massachusetts
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Shpack Landfill formerly operated as a private landfill
covering approximately 8 acres--5.5 acres within the Town of Norton, Bristol County, Massachusetts, the
remaining 2.5 acres within the City of Attleboro. The site is currently fenced to restrict access. The site
accepted wastes from the 1940s until 1965, when it was closed by court order.
 
A survey by the U.S. Department of Energy found radioactive contaminants, primarily radium and uranium,
in soil on the site. In many cases, the radioactive contamination extends to ground water. In addition,
dichloroethylene, trichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene are present in ground water on the site,
according to tests conducted by the State.
 
About 35 private wells within 3 miles of the site serve about 130 people. The nearest well, located 150 feet
away, is shallow. EPA is currently conducting additional monitoring on- and off-site to further characterize
the site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is searching for parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with
Shpack Landfill. In May 1985, EPA completed an assessment that summarized previous studies and
identified data gaps which need to be addressed during a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/
FS). The State will soon implement a quarterly monitoring program of private wells within 0.5 mile of the
site. The next step is the RI/FS, which will determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and
identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
