NPL Site Narrative for Shriver's Corner
 
SHRIVER'S CORNER
Straban Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Shriver's Corner Site is comprised of two areas covering
about 10 acres along Route 394 in Straban Township, Adams County, Pennsylvania. Both areas have
accepted drums of liquid wastes from the Westinghouse Elevator Co. plant in Cumberland Township.
(The Westinghouse plant is also being proposed for the NPL at this time.) Drums of 1,1,1-trichloroethane,
toluene, xylene, and other solvents were disposed of on the property north of Route 394. The southern
property was reportedly used for the disposal of paint sludges, solvents, and 1,1,1-trichloroethane.
 
Ground water is contaminated with various organic compounds, according to tests conducted by EPA and
the State. About 5,000 people use wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water. In April
1984, under a CERCLA Section 106 issued by EPA, Westinghouse removed about 80 surface drums and
250 cubic yards of contaminated soils and sent the materials to an approved disposal site. Westinghouse
has provided carbon filters for some residential wells.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In January 1985, EPA and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources signed a multisite cooperative agreement which provides CERCLA funds to the State
for various sites, including Shriver's Corner. The funds are to start work preparatory to a remedial
investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the types and extent of contamination at the site and
identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
In April 1985, EPA completed a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the
site.
 
A final workplan for the RI/FS is due shortly. The State will then begin to negotiate with potentially
responsible parties for the RI/FS.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
