SIGMON'S SEPTIC TANK SERVICE
Statesville, North Carolina
Iredell County
10th Congressional District
 
Site Location/Size :
  Sigmon's Septic Tank Service is an active facility located in Statesville, North Carolina, in Iredell County.
 
Site History :
  Since 1970, the Sigmon family has owned and operated the septic tank pumping and waste disposal
facility. Since operations began, the Sigmon's Septic Tank Service, a wholly owned subsidiary of AAA
Enterprises, has pumped septic tank wastes and heavy sludges from residential, commercial, and
industrial customers, has installed and repaired septic tanks, and has provided a variety of industrial waste
removal services. From 1978 to 1992, Sigmon's Septic Tank Service disposed of septic wastes in eight
to ten lagoons on the south section of its 15-acre property. No permits were issued by the State of North
Carolina for the lagoons and, in 1995, the State required the closure of the lagoons. According to AAA
Enterprises, seven of the eight lagoons were properly removed. The lagoon sludges were excavated and
piled adjacent to the lagoon area. The waste pile and lagoons still remain on the Sigmon's property at that
location.
 
Site Contamination/Contaminants :
  Facility activities have resulted in releases of dichlorobenzene, mercury, manganese, and nickel to
ground water and arsenic to surface waters downgradient of the facility. Ground water contamination from
facility operations has affected the saprolite/bedrock aquifer system, the principal source of drinking water
in the area, and has been detected in several private drinking water wells. Residents at two properties near
the Sigmon's facility have been advised not to drink the water due to the contamination. Arsenic has been
detected at levels significantly greater than background in an unnamed tributary to the Catawba River,
which is heavily fished and is partially bordered by wetlands.
 
Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment :
  Sigmon's Septic Tank Service is located in a rural area where the primary source of drinking water is
private and community wells. Over 5,000 people receive their drinking water from private or community
wells within four miles of the Sigmon's facility. Surface water runoff from the facility flows into an unnamed
perennial tributary of the Catawba River via intermittent streams and Davidson pond. The unnamed
tributary and the Catawba River are used for fishing, with some locations along the Catawba River being
heavily fished for human consumption. Two stretches of wetlands border surface water within 15 miles
downstream of the Sigmon's waste pile and lagoons.
 
Response Activities (to date) :

  To date, there have been no response activities conducted at this site. A remedial investigation is planned
to determine the extent of contamination.
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated
with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent
of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
