NPL Site Narrative for Silresim Chemical
Corp.
 
SILRESIM CHEMICAL CORP.
Lowell, Massachusetts
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : The Silresim Chemical Corp. Site covers 5 acres in an industrial area
1 mile south of the central business district of Lowell, Massachusetts, and 0.3 mile from several residential
areas. Starting in 1971, Silresim began reclaiming (under a State permit) a variety of chemical wastes,
waste oil, solvents, and sludges containing heavy metals. In 1977, Silresim declared bankruptcy and
abandoned the site, leaving behind 30,000 decaying drums and several large storage tanks. When the
owner abandoned the site, the State undertook a $2.2 million cleanup of the drums and tanks.
 
Ground water flows generally to the northwest toward Meadow Brook, which drains into the Merrimack
River, the source of water for Lawrence. Surface water containing volatile organic compounds,
pesticides,and PCBs drains from the site onto two or possibly three adjacent properties. Soil is similarly
contaminated. A noticeable odor is present and is aggravated by hot or humid weather.
 
Status (July 1983) : In April 1983, EPA completed a Remedial Action Master Plan outlining the
investigations needed to determine the full extent of cleanup required at the site. EPA is upgrading the
fence which surrounds the site and undertaking a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. During the
summer and fall of 1983, EPA is scheduled to demolish the buildings on-site and temporarily encapsulate
the site to prevent contaminants from migrating off-site. Negotiations with parties potentially responsible for
wastes associated with the site will also be undertaken during the summer.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
