NPL Site Narrative for Silver Bow Creek/
Butte Area
 
SILVER BOW CREEK/BUTTE AREA
Silver Bow Creek, Montana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (December 30, 1982) : The Silver Bow Creek Site covers about 24 stream miles
in Silver Bow and Deer Lodge Counties, Montana. The creek, between where it meets Copper Creek in
Butte and Warm Springs Ponds northeast of Anaconda, has been contaminated with a variety of wastes
received from industrial, agricultural, and municipal activities for over 100 years. Contaminants such as
heavy metals and phosphates have been detected in the creek, which is used for drinking, irrigation, and
recreation.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : The State is attempting to remove some of abandoned mine tailings from the
banks of Silver Bow Creek to reduce its contamination.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA has conducted a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site. Preliminary evaluation of data indicates that sources
upstream of the existing site are contributing to contamination in the creek. EPA considered two options
for dealing with the upstream problems -- proposing a separate Butte Area Site or expanding the existing
Silver Bow Creek Site. Believing it is more appropriate to expand the Silver Bow Creek Site to include the
Butte Area, EPA is now proposing to do so and is requesting public comment on the proposal.
 
A thorough analysis of the relationship between the Silver Bow Creek Site and the Butte Area led EPA
to conclude that the geographical relationship of the headwaters of Silver Bow Creek (which originate
a short distance upstream of the Silver Bow Creek drainage area) and the portion of Silver Bow Creek
downstream of the City of Butte favors treating these areas as one site for the NPL. In addition, EPA
decided to analyze the nature and extent of contamination under one comprehensive RI/FS because it
appears that contamination from both areas threatens the same surface water body and the same target
population. The geographic relationship of the two areas suggests that the Butte Area is a major source
of contamination to Silver Bow Creek, which is the major receiving water body for mining discharges and
drainage from the Butte Area. EPA treats sources of and extent of contamination at other sites in this way
and concluded that it was logical to evaluate the Butte Area and the Silver Bow Creek site together. Adding
the Butte Area does not greatly expand the site geographically.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Following analysis of the comments received, EPA added the Butte Area to the
Silver Bow Creek Site and renamed the site "Silver Bow Creek/Butte Area."
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
