NPL Site Narrative for Sinclair Refinery
 
SINCLAIR REFINERY
Wellsville, New York
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : The Sinclair Refinery Site in Wellsville, New York, is a 100-acre refinery
that closed in 1963. Throughout the operation and dismantling of the refinery, various types of wastes
(including cloth filters, fuller's earth, oil sludges, contaminated soil, and fly ash) were disposed of in a 10-
acre landfill adjacent to the Genesee River. In addition, oil and other materials from spills when the refinery
was in operation have apparently saturated much of the soil in the 90-acre refinery portion of the site.
These materials are leaching into the Genesee River.
 
Wellsville draws its drinking water from the Genesee River about 0.5 mile downstream of the site. The river
has changed course and is now eroding the edge of the disposal area. Oily material enters the Genesee
River, and debris from the site litters the banks of the river downstream of the disposal area. The oily
material has been detected in raw water entering the Wellsville water treatment plant. The State found
mercury, PCBs, and oil components in samples collected at the site. The contaminants may be entering
ground water, which supplies about 1,600 nearby residents.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA recently completed a Remedial Action Master Plan outlining the investigations
needed to determine the full extent of cleanup required at the site.
 
The State applied to EPA for a $780,000 Cooperative Agreement to do remedial investigations/feasibility
studies. The first is to select a method for stabilizing the eroding landfill and install gates and warning signs
to limit access. The second is to evaluate and select a remedial solution for the entire site.
 
As a temporary means of stabilizing the landfill, the State has constructed a channel to accommodate a 2-
year frequency flood.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
