NPL Site Narrative for Smuggler Mountain
 
SMUGGLER MOUNTAIN
Pitkin County, Colorado
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Smuggler Mountain Site covers approximately 75 acres
in the vicinity of Aspen, Pitkin County, Colorado. The site includes many old silver and lead mines that
were most active between 1879 and 1920. Little mining is conducted at present. The primary concern
is toxic metals contained in mine wastes, mill tailings, and smelter by-products. Some of these wastes
have been or may be used as fill material for building foundations or street/road construction. A potential
health hazard exists through direct contact and airborne, waterborne, or food-chain exposure to the high
concentrations of toxic metals, especially lead. An EPA site investigation found elevated concentrations
of cadmium, copper, and zinc in wells near the site. High concentrations of toxic metals, including more
than 20,000 parts per million of lead, have been measured in the soils and tailings on the site. Previously,
investigators at the Colorado State University Extension Service measured high concentrations of lead in
leafy green vegetables grown in contaminated soils.
 
Approximately 4,500 full-time residents of the community may be exposed to hazardous materials at the
site.
 
Status (January 1986) : Under a Consent Agreement with EPA, the potentially responsible parties are
conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study under CERCLA to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : This mining site is being placed on the NPL at this time because it is a noncoal
site with mining operations that occurred after August 3, 1977, the enactment date of the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA). Thus, it is neither regulated by SMCRA nor eligible for funds from
the SMCRA Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation Program.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
