NPL Site Narrative for Sol Lynn/Industrial
Transformers
 
SOL LYNN/INDUSTRIAL TRANSFORMERS
Houston, Texas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Sol Lynn/Industrial Transformers Site consists of
three commercial lots on Loop 610 in Houston, Harris County, Texas. The 1-acre site is within 0.5 mile
of the Astrodome, Astroworld amusement park, several industrial plants, and apartment complexes. A
transformer reclamation company and a chemical supply company previously used the property. According
to analyses conducted by the State, oil containing PCBs and approximately 75 drums of trichloroethylene
(TCE) were dumped or spilled on the ground behind warehouses on the site. A well on the site is highly
contaminated with TCE, and sediment samples from a drainage ditch are contaminated with PCBs and
TCE.
 
The State filed suit against the owner/operator (Sol Lynn) in March 1983. In a deposition in February 1984,
he stated that he does not have the financial resources to clean up the site. In April 1984, the State started
to prepare the case for trial.
 
Status (January 1986) : After gathering information to prepare the case for trial, the State dropped the
case.
 
Under a cooperative agreement with EPA, the Texas Water Commission has begun a remedial
investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and
identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : Site cleanup has been separated into two operable units. In the Phase I RI/
FS, released in January 1988, EPA proposed chemical dechlorination of contaminated surface soils to
remove PCBs. The Record of Decision (ROD) documenting the selection of dechlorination was signed in
March 1988. Under a Consent Decree issued in January 1989 under CERCLA Sections 103 and 106, Gulf
States Utilities Co., which is responsible for some wastes associated with the site, will conduct the Phase I
cleanup.
 
A ROD for Phase II, cleanup of ground water and surface soils contaminated with TCE, was signed in
September 1988. Contaminated ground water will be pumped and treated in an air stripping unit.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
