NPL Site Narrative for Solitron Microwave
 
SOLITRON MICROWAVE
Port Salerno, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (March 1998) : Solitron Microwave is located approximately 0.5 mile east of U.S.
Highway 1 in Port Salerno, Martin County, Florida. The facility manufactured miniature-size frequency
connectors and cables as well as solid state resistor networks associated with electroplating. Facility
operations began in 1963 and ended on January 24, 1992, when Solitron Devices (Solitron), the owner of
the facility, went bankrupt.
 
The facility covers approximately 16 acres and consists of a main building, a surface impoundment (pond)
and hazardous waste storage areas. There was a plating area, an industrial wastewater treatment plant
(IWTP) compound and a hazardous waste storage area within the main building. The pond was used
to hold spent rinse water and plating waste that had been through the facility's IWTP. The wastewater
contained concentrations of spent solvents that were reportedly below 10 to 100 micrograms/liter (µg/l).
Solvents were reportedly discharged to the ground in a drum storage area located in the IWTP compound.
Spent solvents were also allowed to discharge from a pipe that drained a bermed drum storage area.
The location of this bermed drum storage area was not indicated in available file material. Chemicals
used in facility operations included tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), chlorine, acetone,
trichloroethane, sulfuric acid, toluene, xylene and several unspecified solvents. Hazardous wastes stored
at the facility consisted of F001 wastes that included PCE, TCE and trichloroethane, and F003 wastes that
included acetone, total xylenes and methyl isobutyl ketone.
 
In February 1985, EPA conducted a Site Screening Investigation at the facility. Acetone, methylene
chloride, toluene and 1,1,1-trichloroethane were detected in a surface water sample collected from the
pond. Acetone was also detected in a sediment sample collected from the pond. Total xylenes and methyl
isobutyl ketone were detected at elevated levels in a soil sample collected from an area that collects runoff
water approximately 150 feet south of the main building.
 
During a Contamination Assessment (CA) conducted by Solitron from December 1988 to February
1989, total xylenes and methylene chloride were detected in soil boring samples collected in the IWTP
compound. Available file material did not indicate the background sample analytical data. Elevated
levels of PCE, TCE, trichloroethane, total xylenes, acetone, vinyl chloride, methylene chloride and 1,1-
dichloroethene were detected in monitoring wells sampled during the 1988-1989 CA. Vinyl chloride and
TCE were detected at Level I concentrations in ground water samples collected from three private drinking
water wells in April 1991 by the Martin County Public Health Unit. Vinyl chloride is a degradation product of
PCE and TCE, which are associated with facility processes.
 
In September 1990, Solitron excavated approximately 264 cubic yards of sediment from the pond and
piled the sediment at the facility. Available file material does not indicate if the sediment was removed from
the facility. From approximately February 1992 until at least April 1993, Solitron provided bottled water to
nearby residents because four wells had become contaminated.
 
Three municipal systems operate wells located within a 4-mile radius of the pond. These wells draw from
the surficial aquifer. The nearest municipal well used for drinking water purposes is located approximately
0.75 mile south of the pond. Currently there are approximately 31,704 ground water users within a 4-mile
radius of the facility.
 
Status (July 1998) : EPA has begun a remedial investigation/feasibility study. The results of the first phase
of sampling was completed in 1998 indicated continued presence of VOCs in ground water.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
