NPL Site Narrative for Solid State Circuits,
Inc.
 
SOLID STATE CIRCUITS, INC.
Republic, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Solid State Circuits, Inc., Site covers about 1 acre in
Republic, Greene County, Missouri. During a drinking water study, EPA detected trichloroethylene (TCE)
in the raw drinking water of one municipal well. The contaminated well has since been shut down. Further
investigations by the city and the State identified the source of the TCE contamination as the property
formerly owned by Solid State Circuits. The company once manufactured printed circuit boards at the site.
Less than 1 acre of soil on the site is contaminated with TCE.
 
During its investigation, the State learned that after a fire occurred at the plant, Solid State Circuits buried
the debris and collapsed the building into the basement of the structure, where there was an unplugged
well.
 
The State has issued an Administrative Order requiring Solid State Circuits and the present property owner
to take remedial action. Solid State excavated material from the basement, installed three monitoring
wells, and then took no further action. The State then started to take initial remedial measures at the
site by pumping out the aquifer. The State anticipates the need to excavate any remaining drums and/or
contaminated soil as well as plug the abandoned well. Republic's water wells, which serve about 7,800
people, are within 500 feet of the site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : On March 6, 1985, EPA issued a CERCLA Section 106 Administrative Order to
Solid State and its parent company, Paradyne Corp. The two companies issued an injunctive complaint
challenging the order on March 14, 1985.
 
In April 1985, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to excavate the basement, the soil underneath
the basement, and the debris. The removal action was completed in October 1985 with the installation
of two wells to extract contaminated ground water. The State has taken the lead at the site, and the
responsible parties have submitted a workplan for a remedial investigation to determine the type and
extent of contamination at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
