NPL Site Narrative for South Bay
Asbestos Area
 
SOUTH BAY ASBESTOS AREA
Alviso, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Portions of Alviso, California, located in north Santa Clara
County on the southern edge of the San Francisco Bay, served as dumping areas for over 30 years.
Companies disposed of asbestos waste in an old municipal landfill. In addition, asbestos waste was used
for fill material at various locations throughout the town.
 
The site was first proposed for listing under the name "Alviso Dumping Areas."
 
Soil in the old landfill and around homes contains asbestos, according to tests conducted by the State.
Construction activities and wind action stir up asbestos-laden dust, posing a potential health risk to
residents. EPA and the State plan to continue sampling the soil and air throughout the 1-square-mile area
to determine the degree of risk to public health.
 
Evening winds may transport asbestos to the San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge, which borders
the town and harbors several endangered species.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In July 1985, EPA entered into an Interagency Agreement with the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The remedial investigation is
scheduled to begin in the spring of 1986.
 
In October 1985, two areas of the town were paved to prevent exposure of residents to potentially
significant levels of asbestos fibers. Additional measures are being considered to further reduce exposures
to asbestos fibers.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
