NPL Site Narrative for Southern
Shipbuilding
 
SOUTHERN SHIPBUILDING
Slidell, Louisiana
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (February 13, 1995) : The Southern Shipbuilding Inc. site is located in Slidell, St.
Tammany Parish, Louisiana, on approximately 54 acres of wooded land at 999 Canulette Road. The site
is adjacent to Bayou Bonfouca, approximately one-half mile downstream of U.S. Highway 433 bridge and
approximately 1.8 miles downstream of the Bayou Bonfouca NPL site. The site is bordered to the north and
west by Bayou Bonfouca, to the east by wooded acreage, and to the south by a residential community of
Slidell. The City of Slidell has a population of approximately 27,000.
 
Barge/ship manufacturing and repair activities were conducted at the site from 1919 to August 1993.
Canulette Shipbuilding owned the site from 1919 until 1954, when it was sold to J&S Shipbuilding. The
site was then sold to the current owner, Southern Shipbuilding Corporation, in 1957. Gas-freeing and
barge cleaning operations were conducted at the site from approximately 1919 to 1971 and the wastes
were disposed of in two surface impoundments (designated as the North and South Impoundments). A
smaller overflow impoundment is located between the North and South Impoundments and was created
from a topographic low spot that continually received oily waste from a leaking pipe connecting the North
and South Impoundments. Water from the North Impoundment was piped to the South Impoundment.
As effluent rose in the South Impoundment, it was channeled through an overflow pipe into the first of
seven baffle ponds that allowed for gravity filtration of wastes until effluent from the seventh baffle pond
discharged to Bayou Bonfouca.
 
Discharge of pond effluent and sanitary wastewater into Bayou Bonfouca was initially regulated under
a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit starting in March 1978. This permit
was terminated in September 1984, when the company reported that it no longer discharged into Bayou
Bonfouca. EPA reissued the NPDES permit in October 1987; it expired in October 1992.
 
The Southern Shipbuilding site was brought to the attention of EPA by the Louisiana Department of
Environmental Quality (LDEQ) in July 1985. EPA completed a preliminary assessment in November 1987.
EPA developed a sampling plan and referred the site to LDEQ. LDEQ sampled the surface impoundments
and the sediments of Bayou Bonfouca in November and December 1992. Results indicated the presence
of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in the impoundments and in bayou sediments. EPA
performed additional sampling as part of a site inspection in August 1993. The analytical results from the SI
confirmed the presence of PAHs in the impoundments and in sediments from Bayou Bonfouca.
 
Known sources of contamination are the North and South Impoundments and the overflow pond. The
baffle system ponds may also be sources.
 
Surface water is the major pathway of concern. Chemical analyses of a sediment sample in the bayou
indicated the presence of numerous PAHs. Bayou Bonfouca is a fishery and is used for recreation.
Additionally, an abundance of contiguous wetland areas and numerous sensitive environments lie along
the banks of Bayou Bonfouca and downstream waterways. These sensitive environments are habitats
for several endangered species-the bald eagle, the peregrine falcon, the brown pelican-and a threatened
species, the Gulf of Mexico sturgeon.
 
Status (May 1995) : The Engineering Evaluation/Cost Analysis and proposed plan for remedial action was
released for public comment on March 13, 1995, and a public meeting was conducted March 21, 1995 to
discuss the proposal.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
