NPL Site Narrative for Southside Sanitary
Landfill
 
SOUTHSIDE SANITARY LANDFILL
Indianapolis, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : Southside Sanitary Landfill covers approximately 160 acres
of the White River floodplain southwest of Indianapolis, Marion County, Indiana. The area is heavily
industrialized. Southside Landfill, Inc., owns the site and started landfilling in December 1971 and is still in
business.
 
In 1971, the 34 acres on the north side of the area were licensed by both Marion County and the State
for disposal of solid wastes. A 100-foot strip of land was excavated to depths of 3 to 6 feet. The loose dirt
was piled on a 50-foot strip of land immediately south of the excavated area for use later as cover material.
After the first excavated area was filled by alternate dumping of refuse and covering with a layer of dirt, a
second area was excavated 150 feet south of the first one. After these areas were filled, the land between
the two was excavated. In 1975, the site was expanded to 160 acres, plus buffers along the edges.
 
In all, more than 4 million cubic yards of waste have been buried at the landfill, according to estimates
made by the U.S. Geological Survey. The wastes include coal tar, asbestos insulation, iron oxide sludge,
paint waste, and clarifier sludge.
 
Metals, including arsenic, chromium, cadmium, and nickel, are present in ground water, according to
analyses conducted by EPA. The landfill lies above a continuous shallow sand and gravel deposit along
White River, Fall Creek, and Eagle Creek. About 6,100 people depend on private wells within 3 miles of
the site that draw on the shallow deposit. The area has been described by several sources, including the
Indiana State Board of Health, as having the greatest potential for ground water development (in terms of
well yield) of any area in Marion County.
 
Eagle Creek is contaminated with metal compounds (aluminum, lead, and zinc), according to tests
conducted by EPA. The creek is used for fishing and boating. All of White River and Eagle Creek is a
potential habitat for the Indiana bat, a species designated as endangered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service.
 
The landfill continues to operate as a solid waste disposal facility under a State permit. The State has
taken an enforcement action based on permit violation and is negotiating a settlement for the alleged
violation with owners and operators involved with the site. In addition, the State is discussing measures to
control leachate with the current owner/operator.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : Under an Agreed Order signed with the State on December 3, 1986, the current
owner/operator constructed an underground slurry wall to control migration of ground water and a leachate
collection system. The owner/operator is now seeking a permit from the State to construct a system for
pretreating the leachate before it is discharged to the sewer system.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
