 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regar ding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agen cy for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq s/index.asp
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
***Final Site*** May 2012 
SOUTHERN  AVENUE INDUSTRIAL AR EA South Gate, California  
 Los Angeles County  
 
 Site Location: 
The site is located in a mixed industrial, commercial and residential area in South Gate, California.   
 Site History: 
Since 1972, the site has been occupied by a facility that manufactures hot -melt adhesive tape for laying carpets. Prior to 1972, Pacific Screw Products Corporation manufactured screw products at the property until the business went bankrupt. The main areas of concern include concrete liners in the pallet manufacturing area, a sump, and an underground storage tank area. Historical Los Angeles County Department of Health Services Hazardous Waste Control Program surveys and notices of violations note the use of trichloroeth ylene (TCE) on the property and improper disposal of unusable oils and solvents.    
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Soil and ground water at, and down gradient of, the s ite are contaminated with TCE. TCE was detected in onsite soils at levels up to 17 parts per billion (ppb) and in ground water beneath the site at levels up to 17,000 ppb. The EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) for TCE in drinking water is 5 ppb.   
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
The extent of ground water contamination needs to be fully characterized. Although the drinking water supply wells immediately down gradient of the site are located in a deeper aquifer and are not currently contaminated, there is the potential that drinking water wells may become contaminated. There are at least 35 drinking water wells within four miles of the site, serving approximately 226,000 people. In addition, due to the high concentrations of TCE in ground water and the relatively shallow depth to ground water (60 feet), there is a need to evaluate the potential for vapor intrusion of TCE from the site into nearby buildings and residential areas.   
 Response Activities (to date): 
In May 2002, the EPA completed a Remedial Investigation of the nearby Cooper Drum NPL site. During the Remedial Investigation, the EPA identified the Southern Avenue Industrial Area site as an additional source of ground water contamination in the area. Based on additional ground water sampling, the EPA determined that the ground water contamination from the Southern Avenue Industrial Area site appears to be commingling  with the down gradient portion of the Cooper Drum plume and requested the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) assume the lead on the Southern Avenue Industrial Area site. DTSC requested that the property owner and operator enter into a consent order, but both declined. Since 2007, DTSC was unsuccessful in attempting to compel the potentially responsible parties to conduct work at the site. Due to the lack of enforcement resources as well as the proximity of the site to the Cooper Drum NPL site, DTSC requested the EPA assume the lead for this site to ensure that investigation work continues and cleanup work begins.   
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of California referred the site to the EPA. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the State of California.    
