 
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST  (NPL)  
***NPL Site***    March 2022 
                        SOUTHEAST HENNEPIN AREA  Minneapolis, Minnesota                          GROUNDWATER AND VAPOR  Hennepin County 
 
 Site Location: The Southeast Hennepin Area Groundwater and Vapor site is located in Minneapolis, Minnesota.   Site History: The site consists of a vapor plume contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs), primarily trichloroethylene (TCE), from several known and unknown sources. The site was identified based on sampling conducted at the General Mills/Henkel Corp. (GMH) NPL site, which is located immediately downgradient. A  groundwater and vapor plume from the Southeast Hennepin Area Groundwater and Vapor site was found to be migrating toward the GMH site. The surrounding area has been developed into commercial and industrial operations since the 1930s. Former and current operations include foundry/outdoor motor manufacturing, metal finishing and dry- cleaning operations that may have used VOCs. A gravel pit also operated in the northern portion of the site where suspected disposal occurred until approximately 1977. Residential properties are located along the southern portion of the site and the area south of Hennepin Avenue is predominantly residential homes.   Site Contamination/Contaminants:  Soil vapor, building sub-slab, and indoor air are contaminated with TCE at concentrations above indoor air and sub- slab vapor screening levels. Shallow groundwater is contaminated with TCE above EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act maximum contaminant level (MCL) and the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) health risk limit (HRL ).   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Environmental investigations have identified a large VOC vapor and groundwater plume in an area which includes commercial properties, and nearby residential properties. In the site study area, several  hundred personnel work in buildings where TCE has been detected above the sub- slab screening values, or in nearby soil gas samples. One of the buildings in the site study area includes 220 faculty/staff/students at a charter school. The owners and tenants  of the charter school and numerous commercial properties conducted sub- slab and indoor air testing to evaluate vapor intrusion risk. In addition, sub-slab depressurization systems were installed in numerous buildings within the site study area to mitigate the vapor exposure potential.   Response Activities (to date): 
 
 
 
 
The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) has managed site contamination for several years under a variety of state programs, both voluntary and enforcement driven, but has been unable to effectuate a comprehensive investigation and clean-up. Several facilities in the study are in the state’s voluntary cleanup program. 
 
 Need for NPL Listing: The state of Minnesota referred the site to the EPA due to the potential impacts, size,  scope and complexity of the site and the need for further investigation and clean- up. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time because further investigation is needed to locate the source(s) of contamination . The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs  
can be found on 
the Internet at https:// www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
