NPL Site Narrative for Southern Maryland
Wood Treating
 
SOUTHERN MARYLAND WOOD TREATING
Hollywood, Maryland
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Southern Maryland Wood Treating Corp. Site is an
inactive wood-preserving facility located on 25 acres in Hollywood, St. Marys County, Maryland. The site
is owned and was operated by Southern Maryland Wood Treating Corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of
L.A. Clarke & Son, Inc., of Fredericksburg, Virginia. L.A. Clarke recently emerged from reorganization
proceedings under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy code.
 
Creosote, pentachlorophenol, benzene, lead, and by-product diethyl hexyl phthalate were disposed in six
unlined lagoons on the site. EPA has detected these contaminants in ground water, surface water, and soil
on the site. Approximately 260 persons depend on wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking
water.
 
Under a State Consent Decree entered in 1980, the company has excavated and treated part of the
contaminated on-site soil.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In October 1984, December 1984, and January 1985, EPA took samples to
characterize site conditions. Based on the analytical results, EPA started emergency measures under
CERCLA in March 1985. The work called for studies to characterize the site, stabilize the site, and
determine how to dispose of contaminants. In March 1985, EPA also started to prepare a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
In January 1986, EPA completed emergency measures. Contaminated soils from lagoons were excavated,
consolidated, and stored on-site for future disposal. The former process area was capped with clay, and
the site graded and seeded.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
