NPL Site Narrative for South Andover Site
 
SOUTH ANDOVER SITE
Andover, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The South Andover Site in Andover, Anoka County, Minnesota,
is a collection of five separately owned contiguous areas covering a total of 37 acres. Between 1969 and
1976, all were used for disposal of hazardous wastes, including inks, paint thinners, paint sludges, acids,
petroleum, and chlorinated solvents. Some flammable liquid wastes were burned in pits, while others may
have been allowed to seep into the ground. There was also considerable spillage and leakage of wastes.
In 1980, an estimated 1,000 drums (most containing ignitable wastes) were on the site, and an unknown
number were suspected of being under the 10 million tires stored in one area. Since then, one owner sold
and removed hundreds of the drums at one time, and unreported removal and disposal probably continue.
The three shallow on-site drinking water wells are contaminated with organic chemical and heavy metals.
No other contamination of drinking water wells has been detected at this time.
 
This site was first listed under the name "Andover Sites."
 
Status (July 1983) : About 370 drums are visible on-site. Most appear to be empty or contain solid, dried-
out material. However, a number are full, and a few of these are leaking. In addition, some drums may
be buried under the tires. Some soil is heavily contaminated. An EPA study underway indicates that the
shallow aquifer is heavily contaminated at one location by what appears to be rich fuel oil; 10 to 100 parts
per million of naphthalene, bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, phenanthrene, and fluorene are also reported.
However, this heavy contamination is localized and is not moving at this time.
 
The State negotiated unsuccessfully with the owners and about four generators for cleanup of surface
wastes, monitoring, and purging of ground water at the area of high contamination. The State plans to
request CERCLA funds for cleanup.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
