OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribal, and Site Identification Branch 
Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2007 
SOUTH MINNEAPOLIS Minneapolis, Minnesota 
 RESIDENTIAL SOIL CONTAMINATION
 Hennepin County 
à Site Location: 
The South Minneapolis Residential Soil Contamination site, also known as the Phillips Neighborhood, in Minneapolis, Hennepin County, Minnesota, is located in close proximity to  a former industrial source area known as the CMC Heartland Lite Yard. The area of potential concern includes residential properties with arsenic-contaminated soil located within an area covering approximately 0.75 square mile. The residential soil contaminated properties are not contained and pose a threat to area residents, workers, and students. 
´ Site History: 
The residential soil contamination was discovered during an  investigation of residential soils that the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) undertook in  residential yards located downwind of the CMC Heartland Lite Yard property. The CMC Heartland Lite Yard property was leased and operated by Reade Manufacturing, who produced arsenic and/or lead arsenate-based grasshopper pesticide from 1938 th rough 1963.  From 1963 through 1968, U.S. Borax sub-leased the parcel and stored and shipped product duri ng that time.  Arsenic was detected in soil at the CMC Heartland Lite Yard site at concentrations up to 3,000 times greater than background levels.  The CMC Heartland Lite Yard site was previously addressed by the MDH Voluntary Cleanup Program.  
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Based on sampling events conducted by the State of Minnesota and EPA from 2001 to 2006, approximately 200 properties were identified that contain arsenic in soil that posed an immediate threat to human health.  The number of properties that contain arsenic that pose a long term risk to human health will be determined  with further investigations. 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: 
Soil contamination at the South Minneapolis Residential So il Contamination site has been found to pose an immediate threat to human health on approximately 200 properties.  
3 Response Activities (to date): 
As of Spring 2007, EPA has excavated contaminated soil with arsenic levels greater than 95 parts per million (ppm) at 95 residential properties. In 2007, EPA is conducting additional so il removal at identified residences with arsenic levels greater than 95 ppm. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
