NPL Site Narrative for Southern Solvents,
Inc.
 
SOUTHERN SOLVENTS, INC.
Tampa, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (May 11, 2000) : Southern Solvents, Inc. is located at 4109 West Linebaugh
Avenue in Tampa, Hillsborough County, Florida. From 1977 until 1985, Southern Solvents served
as a distribution and retail point for tetrachloroethylene, also known as perchloroethylene or PCE.
Tetrachloroethylene was stored in four aboveground storage tanks at the facility for distribution to dry
cleaners in the area. After 1985, the facility property was leased to P.J.'s Spa until 1989 and is currently
leased to AAA Diversified Services, which specializes in commercial painting. The site is being proposed to
the NPL because elevated concentrations of tetrachloroethylene attributable to the former operations have
been detected in ground water and nearby private drinking water wells.
 
The property is approximately 100 feet wide and 185 feet deep. A one-story metal warehouse is the
only building on the property. During former solvent distribution operations, the aboveground storage
tanks stood on a concrete pad on the north end of the building. One former tank had a total capacity
of 3,000 gallons. The size of the other three tanks is unknown. The aboveground storage tanks were
individually filled from tanker trucks that brought the product to the facility. Several leaks and spills of
tetrachloroethylene occurred while the tanks were being filled and emptied. The spilled tetrachloroethylene
was not contained and migrated from the concrete pad into the adjacent sandy soil.
 
In 1988 and 1989, the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services sampled the facility's
drinking water well and several adjacent private drinking water wells. Elevated levels of tetrachloroethylene
and the related compounds trichloroethylene and 1,2-dichloroethane were measured in the facility's well
and four other wells. The Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services immediately advised
people to discontinue using water from these wells and provided bottled water to the property owners and
tenants for drinking, cooking, and bathing.
 
Additional investigations in 1989, 1994, and 1998-1999 also detected high levels of tetrachloroethylene
in soil and ground water. During the 1998-1999 investigation, EPA detected high concentrations of
tetrachloroethylene in the soil (in excess of 10,000 mg/kg) and in ground water samples from both the
surficial and Floridan aquifers underlying the facility and adjacent properties.
 
The Florida Cites Water Department and the Northwest Hillsborough County Utilities maintain four
municipal wells that draw water from the Floridan aquifer within 4 miles of the facility. These wells supply
water to over 46,000 people in St. Petersburg, Hillsborough County, and the surrounding community.
Several private and community wells serving approximately 700 people also draw water from the Floridan
aquifer within 4 miles of the facility.
 
Status (July 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
