OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May  2019  
SPORLAN  VALVE  PLANT  #1 Washington, Missouri  
Franklin  County  
Site Location:
The Sporlan Valve Plant #1 site is an unoccupied 6.3- acre parcel of land, located at 611 East 7th Street near downtown Washington, Franklin County, Missouri. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) detected in groundwater at the site have migrated beyond the property boundaries. 
 Site History: 
The Sporlan Valve Plant #1 site was first developed as a refrigeration valve manufacturing facility in 1939. The site operations at the plant included plating, degreasing, machining, assembly, and testing. Over the course of the facility's manufacturing history, three above-ground storage tanks, ranging in size from 200 to 2,000 gallons, and three underground storage tanks, ranging in size from 2,000 to 10,000 gallons, were used to store solvents and fuel oil. 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Soil and groundwater at the site are contaminated with VOCs, including trichloroethylene (TCE), tetrachloroethylene (PCE), cis-1,2-dichlorothene (DCE), and vinyl chloride. Vapors from the groundwater contamination were found in the indoor air and sub-slab soil gas in homes near the site. 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
There is potential for vapor intrusion into residential properties that overlie the VOC -contaminated shallow groundwater plume. Because the site is located in a residential area, a devel oper has expressed interest in building additional homes if the contamination is cleaned up. 
 Response Activities (to date): 
The Missouri Department of Natural Resources and the EPA installed sub -slab depressurization vapor mitigation systems (VMS) at approximately 20 nearby homes as a result of an investigation conducted by the responsible party that found VOCs exceeding benchmark levels in the sub -slab and/or indoor air. Further assessment activities are expected to identify additional homes that may warrant mitigation systems.  
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of Missouri referred the site to the EPA because the shallow VOC -contaminated groundwater plume is migrating and may contaminate more residential properties. The mitigation systems are offering  a temporary solution for reducing exposure to VOC vapors, but NPL listing is needed to remediate the source at the former facility. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices]  For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human hea lth, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800 -CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
