NPL Site Narrative for Sprague Road
Ground Water Plume
 
SPRAGUE ROAD GROUND WATER PLUME
Odessa, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 1997) : A plume of contaminated ground water has been identified in
Odessa, Ector County, Texas. The precise extent of the plume has not yet been identified; however, based
on analyses of ground water from 14 wells, it is approximately 180 acres in area. The primary contaminant
detected in the ground water plume is chromium. Three chromium plating facilities with various potential
sources of contamination have been identified in the immediate area of the plume -- Leigh Metal Plating,
Inc.; National Chromium Corporation; and Machine and Casting, Inc. Several potential sources at these
facilities have been presented in the HRS documentation record as potential sources because of their
proximity to the ground water plume and the presence of the same contaminants as those identified in
the plume. However, adequate information is not available to directly attribute contamination detected at
these facilities with the ground water plume. Therefore, the site has been scored based on a contaminated
ground water plume with no single source identified.
 
Based on analytical results from various investigations conducted at the three facilities, a plume of
contaminated ground water at concentrations ranging up to 5,240 micrograms per liter (µg/L) has been
identified. The ground water pathway contamination is of concern because of the documentation of
observed releases of chromium in ground water (nine ground water drinking wells and five ground water
monitoring wells) and the fact that the contaminated aquifer is used as a source of drinking water in the
area. Seven of the nine drinking water wells have concentrations of chromium that exceed the Maximum
Contaminant Level.
 
Status (September 1997) : EPA conducted a response action by removing solid and liquid wastes at Leigh
Metal Plating and National Chromium, and contaminated soil at Leigh Metal Plating. Removal actions by
EPA resulted in 6,620 gallons of liquid and solid wastes, 156,320 pounds of vat and tank liquid and sludge,
and 5,187,340 pounds of soil removed from the site. EPA has also begun investigation of the ground water
contamination near the three facilities by installing 12 monitoring wells and collecting 40 water samples
from monitoring wells and nearby private water supply wells.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
