 OLEM/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** May 2018 
SPRING PARK MUNICIPAL WELL FIELD Spring Park, Minnesota Hennepin County 
 
 Site Location: The Spring Park Municipal Well Field  site consists of a ground water plume of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that has contaminated the ground water in the city of Spring Park, Minnesota. The plume has contaminated two of the city’s three municipal wells.   Site History: In 2004, the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH) found VOCs, primarily trichloroethylene (TCE), in treated water coming from the Spring Park Treatment Plant. Since that time, cis -1,2-dichloroethylene (DCE) and vinyl chloride have also been found at low concentrations. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) and the EPA have not yet been able to identify the source of the contamination in the city’s wells .   Site Contamination/Contaminants: Two of the three city wells have been contaminated with TCE at concentrations that exceed the EPA’s Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs) and the Minnesota safe drinking water criteria. Other VOCs have also been found at lower levels. The levels of VOC contamination in the ground water are not decreasing.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : Area residents are connected to the municipal water supply distribution systems and use municipal water as their drinking water and for other domestic purposes. There are approximately 1,673 residents in Spring Park, all of whom are served by the Spring Park municipal water supply.   Response Activities (to date): Concentrations of TCE in untreated water from two of the city wells increased to the point that the city could no longer dilute the TCE to safe levels by blending with water pumped from the third municipal well which is not contaminated. The uncontaminated well, which draws from a deeper aquifer; is not capable of delivering sufficient quantities of water to replace the contaminated wells on a lo ng-term basis. MPCA has worked with the city of Spring Park on design and installation of a water treatment process to remove chlorinated solvents from the contaminated ground water supply wells. This interim measure does not address the source of contamination in the city’s drinking water which will still require long-term treatment.   Need for NPL Listing: The state of Minnesota referred the site to the EPA because the site requires further investigation and long -term cleanup. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The EPA has received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices]   For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1- 800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
 
