NPL Site Narrative for St. Augusta
Sanitary Landfill/Engen Dump
 
ST. AUGUSTA SANITARY LANDFILL/ENGEN DUMP
St. Augusta Township, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : The St. Augusta Sanitary Landfill/Engen Dump covers
about 50 acres just west of the Mississippi River in St. Augusta Township, Stearns County, Minnesota. The
site is approximately 4 miles south of the city of St. Cloud and 1 mile from the hamlet of St. Augusta.
 
The site was originally proposed for listing under the name "St. Augusta Sanitary Landfill/St. Cloud Dump."
 
The Engen Dump operated on a 10-acre portion of the site from 1966 until 1971. At that time, the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) issued a permit for operation of Engen Landfill No. 1 on
approximately 40 acres adjacent to the Engen Dump. In 1973, the MPCA permit was assigned to Ervin
Schramel and Landfill, Inc. From 1973 to April 1982, the company operated the 40-acre portion under the
name St. Augusta Sanitary Landfill. In 1983, the site ceased operations and was covered with a clay cap.
 
MPCA files indicate that paint wastes, solvents, high-lead sludges, and ash from hazardous waste
incineration were buried at the site in sandy soils. The shallow aquifer that is the only source of drinking
water for about 1,400 people is contaminated with benzene, 1,1,2-trichloroethylene, arsenic, lead, and
chromium, according to tests conducted by MPCA.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : A steering committee has been formed representing approximately 40 parties
potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site. The committee has issued a request for
proposal to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
