NPL Site Narrative for Stamina Mills, Inc.
 
STAMINA MILLS, INC.
North Smithfield, Rhode Island
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The Stamina Mills, Inc., Site covers 50 acres in North Smithfield,
Rhode Island. In 1969, to reduce water pollution from its textile weaving and finishing mill, the company
adopted a solvent scouring system to replace a water/detergent system, which discharged untreated
waste waters into the nearby Branch River. Spent solvents from the system were recycled in on-site
stills. Oils and other contaminants removed from the fabric remained in the still bottoms, and these were
deposited in an on-site landfill at a rate of about 1 barrel per day. In the early 1970s, about 800 gallons of
trichloroethylene solvent spilled in the process of transferring a load from a tanker truck. Shortly thereafter,
Stamina detected an odor and "sweet taste" in its drinking water and began to use bottled water. In 1974,
Stamina discontinued all wet processing, including the solvent scouring system. From 600 to 700 gallons
of solvent remain in storage tanks on-site. The mill was later sold. A fire in 1977 destroyed the mill, and
the storage tanks could not be found. The State detected organic solvents in 41 of 53 wells in Forestdale,
including a community well serving 12 homes and approximately 50 people.
 
A hydrogeological investigation was commissioned by EPA in 1981.
 
This site was first listed under the name "Forestdale-Stamina Mills, Inc."
 
Status (July 1983) : The hydrogeological study concluded that the most probable source of
trichloroethylene contamination of the Forestdale wells is the former Stamina Mills Site. A public water
supply has been installed to serve the contaminated area. EPA is now reviewing enforcement alternatives.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
