STANDARD CHLORINE
Kearny, New Jersey
Hudson County
 
Site Location :
  The Standard Chlorine Chemical Company, Inc. (Standard Chlorine), site is located in an industrial area
along the Hackensack River in Kearny Township, New Jersey.
 
Site History :
  Chemical manufacturing occurred at the 25-acre facility from the early 1900s to the 1990s. Operations
included the production and refinement of naphthalene, the storage and packaging of 1,4-dichlorobenzene
moth preventatives and deodorizers, the production of dye carriers, and the processing of liquid petroleum
naphthalene for the manufacture of moth balls and flakes, as well as several other manufacturing activities.
 
Site Contamination/Contaminants :
  The primary areas of concern include contaminated soils throughout the site, and two lagoons located on
the eastern portion of the facility property. Another concern is an area contaminated with polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) in the vicinity of a former transformer. All of these areas appear to ultimately drain into
the Hackensack River. Contamination in the soils and groundwater also appears to discharge directly
to surface water bodies. Tanks and drums that contained various site-related hazardous substances,
including dioxin contaminated asbestos, also are present at the facility. In addition, contaminated fill
material from non-site related chromium ore processing activities is present on the site property, as well as
on other properties in the Hackensack Meadowlands.Sampling conducted between 1992 and 2002 indicate
that a release of site-related hazardous substances has occurred to the Hackensack River and adjacent
wetlands. Dioxins, dichlorobenzenes, 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene, naphthalene, benzene, and chlorobenzene,
as well as several other semivolatile and volatile organic compounds, have been detected at varying
levels .
 
Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment :
  Fish consumption warnings (particularly crab) and a health advisory have been issued for the
Hackensack River due to PCBs and dioxin contamination, originating in part from the Standard Chlorine
site. The site lies in the Hackensack Meadowlands which has been identified by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service as a Significant Habitat Complex of the New York Bight Watershed at the request of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) New York - New Jersey Harbor Estuary Program, and may be
a habitat for some state or Federal designated endangered and/or threatened species. Releases of site-
related hazardous substances to ground water also have been documented since at least the early 1980s.
 
Response Activities (to date) :
  In December 2001, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) requested that
EPA evaluate the Standard Chlorine site for listing on the National Priorities List due to the complex
environmental issues present at the site and the inability of the responsible parties to address the issues.
The NJDEP indicated that Standard Chlorine had not completed Remedial Investigation activities required
under the terms of a 1989 Administrative Consent Order (ACO).
 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated
with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent
of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
