NPL Site Narrative for Standard Auto
Bumper Corp.
 
STANDARD AUTO BUMPER CORP.
Hialeah, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Standard Auto Bumper Corp. has electroplated automobile
bumpers, furniture, and other metal objects with chrome on a 0.8-acre site at 2500 West 3rd Court,
Hialeah, Florida, since 1959. The site is in an urban area in northwest Dade County north of Miami
International Airport.
 
Prior to 1970, waste water from the electroplating and stripping process was discharged into a ditch
between the process building and railroad tracks. It was allowed to drain to the north, eventually
percolating into the ground. In 1972, the company began treating the plating waste prior to discharging
it into a septic tank/percolator pit and drain field system. Since 1979, treated waste water has been
discharged into the Hialeah sewer system. The metal-containing sludge from the treatment is transported
to an EPA-regulated hazardous waste facility. Currently, approximately 2,000-3,000 gallons per day of
waste water are sent to a concrete diked area, where it is treated to convert hexavalent chromium to the
less toxic trivalent state.
 
In August 1985, EPA detected cadmium, chromium, lead, and copper in surface soil, subsurface soil, and
ground water on the site. The most extensive contamination was near the drainage pathway. In March
1987, EPA found chromium, nickel, and copper in surface soil, subsurface soil, and shallow ground water
in the drainage pathway area.
 
The site is in the recharge zone of the Biscayne Aquifer, which EPA has designated as a sole source
aquifer under the Safe Drinking Water Act. The aquifer supplies drinking water for all of Dade County. Four
municipal well fields -- the Upper and Lower Miami Springs, the Hialeah, and the John E. Preston -- that
supply drinking water to 750,000 people are within 3 miles of the site. One well is within 4,200 feet of the
site. Wells in the contaminated area have been taken out of service.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : Under a CERCLA Administrative Order issued in May 1989, Standard Auto
Bumper is removing contaminated soil from the site and transporting it to an EPA-regulated facility.
 
EPA is investigating the possibility that potentially responsible parties will conduct a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
