 
 
OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch  Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** September 2005 
STANDARD MINE Gunnison National Forest, Colorado 
Gunnsion County 3rd  Congressional District 
à Site Location/Size: 
Standard Mine is a former hard rock mine located at 10,000 ft. in elevation in the Ruby Range of the Gunnison National Forest i n Colorado. The former mine is located on several patented mini ng claims and the surrounding land. It is about 10 acres in size. The nearest municipality is the Town of Crested Butte, Co lorado, located 10 miles southeast of Standard Mine. 
 
´ Site History: 
Mining activity began at Standard Mine around 1874. However, the most significant ope rations began in 1931 with the mining of lead, zinc, silver, and gold. Operations ceased in 1966 and the mi ne was abandoned. The patented mining claims are owned by Standard Metals Corporation. The surrounding land is owned by the U.S. Forest Service (USFS). Contamination from former mining operations spills off the claims onto the USFS land. 
The mine consists of many open, unmarked adits and shafts, gi ving access to 8400 feet of mine workings on 6 levels. The site al so has a dilapidated mill and railroad tracks running 50 feet above the ground with rotti ng wooden support poles. The former mine is near a popular hiking trail and has no access restrictions. There is evid ence of human activity at the site. Wastes at this mining s ite are estimated to be 53,560 cubic yards of waste rock and 29,340 c ubic yards of mill tailings as well as seasonably variable amounts  of water flowing out of the adits. Additionally, the USFS portion of land contains a non-engineered surface impoundment made entir ely of highly mineralized waste rock. The unlin ed impoundment was built to collect metal-laden acid mine drainage containing cadmiu m, copper, lead, and zinc. There is evidence of overflow and seep age through the impoundment into Elk Creek, which runs directly adjacent to the mine. Elk Creek feeds into Coal Creek, which is a drinking water supply for the Town of Crested Butte four mile s downstream from the former mine. 
 
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Contaminants of concern associated with the former mine opera tions are metals – mostly cadmium, zinc, lead, and copper –  significantly above background levels for the area. Sources of c ontamination to Elk Creek include: open adits that release acid  mine drainage and an unlined surface impoundment (300 foot wide by 15 foot deep) that intermittently overflows and leaks contaminate d water directly into Elk creek.  
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
Wastes at Standard Mine continue to impact surface water in the area. Elk Creek is devoid of all aquatic life and feeds directl y into Coal Creek. The Town’s drinking water supply is taken from Coal Creek four miles downstream from the former mine. In the arid western parts of the United States, water rights are very important. This is the only permanent source of drinking water availa ble to the town. Evidence of staining on the downgradient side of the surface impoundment and the creek bed itself indicates significant p eriods of overflow and seepage. Although the quality of the water during episodic overflow of the surface impoundment is unknown, contaminants are significantly above background levels at the in take. The drinking water system, however, currently does meet S afe Drinking Water Act standards. 
Because the impoundment is constructed entir ely of metal-laden waste rock, the acidi c water in the impoundment further dissolve s the metal compounds from the waste rock, weakening the structure ove r time. Therefore, there is particular concern about the po tential catastrophic failure of the surface impoundment. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
To date, there have been no response activities. The former mine  is remote and only accessible three months out of the year. Th e USFS conducted an Engineering Evaluation/Cost Analysis in 2002. Th e USFS is planning to cost share the cleanup effort but needs  the site to be included in the NPL to prioritize their clea nup funding. The State, EPA, and USFS will be working together cooperatively on this site to address a ll of the environmental concerns.  
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
 For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
