NPL Site Narrative for Star Lake Canal
 
STAR LAKE CANAL
Port Neches, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 22, 1999) : The Star Lake Canal site is located in Port Neches, Texas,
an industrial city adjacent to the Neches River in east Texas. The site consists of contaminated surface
water sediments in the Jefferson Canal, Star Lake Canal, and Molasses Bayou. The Jefferson and Star
Lake canals have received industrial wastewater and stormwater discharges from local chemical and
other manufacturing facilities for a number of years. Although these discharges and other waste disposal
activities likely account for the contamination found in the surface water sediments, to date, the Texas
Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) has been unable to identify one or more specific
sources of the contamination. This site is being added to the NPL based on evidence that hazardous
substances, including chromium, copper, polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs), have migrated or could potentially migrate to Molasses Bayou, Star Lake Canal, Neches
River, Sabine Lake and their associated wetlands.
 
In response to contamination discovered during dredging in the Jefferson Canal, TNRCC collected
sediment samples in 1996 and 1998 from the Jefferson Canal, Star Lake Canal, and wetlands bordering
the Molasses Bayou. TNRCC found elevated concentrations of chromium, copper, polynuclear aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs), and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in the canal sediments and elevated
concentrations of copper, PAHs, and pesticides in the Molasses Bayou wetlands.
 
In the absence of a specific source of contamination, the Star Lake Canal site has been identified as
an area of contaminated sediments. The contaminated sediments extend more than 2 miles, spanning
portions of Jefferson Canal, Star Lake Canal, and the Molasses Bayou to within 1/4-mile of where the
Molasses Bayou, Star Lake Canal, and Neches River converge.
 
More than 3 miles of wetlands front the surface water in which contaminated sediments have been
detected. These wetlands are habitats known to be used by the white-faced ibis, a State-designated
threatened species. From the confluence of the Molasses Bayou, Star Lake Canal, and Neches River,
surface water flows down the Neches River approximately 3 1/2 miles to Sabine Lake. Sabine Lake is used
as a fishery and produced more than 1 million pounds of fish and shellfish in 1996.
 
Status (July 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
