NPL Site Narrative for State Marine of Port
Arthur
 
STATE MARINE OF PORT ARTHUR
Jefferson County, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (March 1998) : The State Marine of Port Arthur site (State Marine), also known
as State Welding and Marine Works and Golden Triangle Shipyard, is located on Old Yacht Club Road
on Pleasure Islet, a peninsula located approximately 1/2 mile southwest of the mouth of the Neches River
where it enters Sabine Lake in Jefferson County, Texas. The site occupies approximately 17.5 acres,
which includes Tract 3 and Tract 6. The site includes contaminated sediments in Sabine Lake from barge
cleaning operations conducted at the site.
 
In 1974, State Marine was issued a wastewater discharge permit (No. 01859) from the Texas Department
of Water Resources (TDWR) to operate a barge cleaning facility for vessels carrying petroleum and other
chemical products. The washwater from operations was allegedly pumped into a wastewater treatment
system, which consisted of a wash and cleaning area next to several docks out into Sabine Lake, a boiler
house that heated the cleaning and washwater with a steam boiler, several vacuum tanks, a vacuum
pump, above-ground storage tanks and an open, earthen diked surface impoundment into which the barge
chemical wastes and washwater were discharged. State Marine was cited for a number of violations of
its wastewater discharge permit by the TDWR and the Texas Air Control Board (now both known as the
Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC)). On June 29, 1981 the State of Texas
signed an Agreed Order for Temporary Injunction, which required proper site closure. On December 9,
1982 a Judgement of Contempt and Order of Commitment was signed, which ordered State Marine to
comply with the Agreed Order. On January 16, 1987 the State Marine site was listed second in the Texas
Register of hazardous waste facilities that pose an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health
and safety or the environment. On March 16, 1988 the State of Texas issued a "Superfund" Administrative
Order to State Marine requiring all responsible parties to perform a complete Remedial Investigation (RI)
and Feasibility Study (FS) at the site.
 
The State Marine site was first brought to the attention of EPA by the Texas Water Commission in 1987
for evaluation under the 1982 version of the Hazard Ranking System (HRS) where it fell below the cut-off
score required for remedial activities under CERCLA at that time. The site was referred to EPA in 1992 for
consideration under the revised 1990 HRS (40 CFR Part 300, Appendix A, Hazardous Ranking System). In
January 1995, EPA requested that TNRCC perform an Expanded Site Inspection at State Marine. Sample
results indicated the presence of organics and inorganics in the buried surface impoundments and former
tank farm located at the site as well as in the sediments of Sabine Lake adjacent to the site.
 
Known sources of contamination are the buried surface impoundment, the former tank farm area and an
area of contaminated soils adjacent to the shoreline of Sabine Lake.
 
Surface water is the major pathway of concern. Chemical analysis of sediment samples in Sabine Lake
indicated the presence of organics and inorganics. Sabine Lake is a fishery and is used for recreation. In
addition, an abundance of wetland areas and a National Wildlife Refuge lie along the banks of Sabine Lake
and downstream waterways.
 
Status (July 1998) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
