NPL Site Narrative for State Road 114
Ground Water Plume
 
STATE ROAD 114 GROUND WATER PLUME
Levelland, Texas
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 1999) : The State Road 114 Ground Water Plume site consists of the
contaminated ground water plume in the aquifer underlying the western boundary of the City of Levelland,
Hockley County, Texas, approximately 31 miles due west of Lubbock. The ground water is primarily
contaminated with 1,2-dichloroethane (1,2-DCA) and vanadium. Impacts from 1,2-DCA, vanadium, and/
or metals contamination have been identified in 28 ground water supply wells, and a number of the City of
Levelland's public water supply wells are in the immediate migration path of the ground water plume.
 
Contamination by 1,2-DCA was first detected by the Texas Department of Health in June 1990 in a
sample collected from the Farmers Co-op Elevator Association well. Contamination by 1,2-DCA was
again detected in this well the following year. Subsequent investigations by the Texas Natural Resources
Conservation Commission (TNRCC) and EPA from 1995 through 1998 identified impacts from 1,2-DCA,
vanadium, and/or metals contamination in 28 ground water wells in the area, including: 19 residential wells,
five business wells, three City of Levelland public water supply wells, and one irrigation well. During these
investigations, efforts were made to locate the source of the ground water contamination. Despite these
efforts, however, no conclusive evidence was identified confirming one or more contaminant sources.
 
In the absence of a specific source of contamination, the State Road 114 Ground Water Plume site
has been identified as a plume of contaminated ground water in the Ogallala Aquifer where 28 wells
have significant levels of contamination. The plume extends from west to east (in the direction of ground
water flow) along West State Highway 114 for approximately 1 and 1/2 miles from the former Motor
Fuels Corporation (MFC) property to the City of Levelland municipal park. The ground water plume is
approximately a mile wide, bounded roughly by Ellis Road to the north and Houston Avenue to the south.
Analyses of samples collected during site investigations to date indicate 1,2-DCA concentrations as high
as 182 micrograms per liter (µg/l) and vanadium concentrations as high as 490 µg/l. EPA has established
a maximum contaminant level (MCL) for 1,2-DCA in drinking water of 5 µg/l. No MCL currently exists for
vanadium; however, the Superfund Removal Action Level for vanadium is 250 µg/l.
 
The Ogallala Aquifer is the principal source of drinking water for residents in Hockley County. Site
investigations conducted by the TNRCC and the EPA to date have identified 15 wells contaminated
with 1,2-DCA and vanadium, one well with 1,2-DCA only, and 12 wells with vanadium only. The Texas
Department of Health has advised owners of the impacted wells that use of the well water is unsafe. EPA
is partnering with the TNRCC to address the hazards posed by the use of this water and has initiated
a program to install and maintain ground water filtration systems for these wells. Filtration units have
been installed on 14 of the 16 wells contaminated with 1,2-DCA, including the Farmers Co-op Elevator
Association well. The remaining two wells are not used for drinking water. Filtration systems have also
been installed at three businesses where elevated levels of vanadium or metals contamination have
impacted ground water quality.
 
The City of Levelland draws approximately one-third of its drinking water from the Ogallala Aquifer and
obtains the remainder of its water supply from surface water sources. The city operates 17 public water
supply wells, all of which are located downgradient and within 4 miles of the center of the ground water
plume. The city's ground water wells serve 4,200 people of a total population of 14,000. A public well was
closed during the 1960s due to taste and odor problems. Contamination by 1,2-DCA has been detected in
this well.
 
Status (October 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
