NPL Site Narrative for State Disposal
Landfill, Inc.
 
STATE DISPOSAL LANDFILL, INC.
Grand Rapids, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The State Disposal Landfill, Inc., Site covers approximately
30 acres north of Grand Rapids in Plainfield Township, Kent County, Michigan. After operating under two
owners during 1966-72, the landfill was owned and operated by Waste Management, Inc., during 1972-76.
In August 1975, the landfill received a permit from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources (MDNR)
to accept general refuse. Since 1976, Waste Management has maintained the landfill. It is now covered
with a layer of clay and is equipped with methane gas vents.
 
Ground water occurs at about 75 feet or less. The permeable glacial outwash and postglacial alluvium
deposits that underlie the site facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water. In October 1983,
MDNR found that four township wells and numerous residential wells downgradient of the site were
contaminated with trichloroethylene, 1,2-dichloroethane, cis-1,2-dichloroethylene, 1,1-dichloroethane,
xylene, and other organic compounds. Water from the municipal wells is blended with other water and
used as a backup supply; municipal service has been extended to owners of contaminated private wells.
In August 1985, EPA detected trans-1,2-dichloroethylene, ethylbenzene, xylenes, barium, and nickel in
monitoring wells downgradient of the site. An estimated 13,000 people obtain drinking water from public
and private wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
In 1985, Waste Management hired a consultant to conduct a hydrogeological investigation of the site and
install monitoring wells.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : Waste Management has conducted two hydrogeological studies in the
immediate vicinity and downgradient of the landfill. These studies did not identify the source of all
downgradient contamination. MDNR and Waste Management are discussing a third hydrogeological study,
as well as a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the
site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
