NPL Site Narrative for Stauffer Chemical
Co (Tampa)
 
STAUFFER CHEMICAL CO (TAMPA)
Tampa, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 1996) : The Stauffer Chemical Company site is located in an industrial
portion of the City of Tampa, Hillsborough County, Florida. The former Stauffer facility is bordered by the
CSX railroad to the north, the Tampa Bypass Canal to the east, Orient Road and the Helena Chemical
Company to the northwest and west, and a Department of Transportation maintenance facility to the south.
The central portion of the property contains numerous structures including an office and a warehouse. The
southern and eastern portions of the site are heavily vegetated. There are two large ponds in the east-
central portion of the facility.
 
From 1951 until 1986 Stauffer manufactured various pesticides and herbicides including chlordane,
dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane, dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, alpha-,
beta-, and gamma-BHC, and toxaphene. These compounds have been detected in soil, ground water,
and/or air samples collected over the previous eight years by EPA and Stauffer. Several site investigations
have been conducted at the facility including a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study.
 
Ground water is first encountered at depths less than 5 feet below ground surface. The direction of flow is
to the southeast, toward the Tampa Bypass Canal. Six municipal wells serving a relatively few number of
people and several private and non-municipal drinking water wells are located within a 4-mile radius of the
site.
 
The residential population within a 4-mile radius of the site is 80,731. A documented release of pesticides
to air was established by EPA in 1988 during an on-site air sampling event. A caretaker resides on the
facility. The west indian manatee is the only federally designated endangered species known to inhabit
areas within 4 miles of the site. Its potential habitat is the Tampa Bypass Canal. There are approximately
1,380 acres of wetlands located within a 4-mile radius of the Stauffer site.
 
The Stauffer Chemical Company site was originally proposed to the National Priorities List in February
1992. The EPA is re-proposing this site in response to public comments received at the time of the original
proposal.
 
Status (December 1996) : A Record of Decision for remediation of site contaminants was signed in
December 1996. The remedy selected was bioremediation. Stauffer is currently conducting a Treatability
Study for the site. Remedial Design is scheduled for completion by mid-year 1997.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
