NPL Site Narrative for Stewco, Inc.
 
STEWCO, INC.
Waskom, Texas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Stewco, Inc., formerly owned, operated, and maintained
a fleet of trucks on a 2.5-acre site on Texas Farm Market Road 9, about 0.5 mile south of Interstate 20
in Waskom, Harrison County, Texas. The company contracted with the oil and gas industry to haul glue,
resin, gasoline, diesel fuel, jet fuel, and creosote. The tank trucks were steam-cleaned between loads with
an alkaline solution. The wash water was routed to Pond 1 to evaporate. The overflow from Pond 1 went
to Pond 2, in which a spray evaporation system was installed and sometimes operated. The overflow from
Pond 2 was to be trucked to a third pond on another site.
 
The ponds are unlined and in poor condition. Drainage from the parking area around the truck terminals
flows into the ponds, causing them to overflow. The ponds were to be skimmed to minimize the oil layer
on the surface. EPA has found no record of the ponds ever being skimmed. Thus, when the ponds
overflowed, the surface layer of oil moved with the overflow onto surrounding drainage areas.
 
According to analyses conducted by EPA, on-site soil, surface water, and ground water are contaminated
with tetrachloroethane, methylene chloride, naphthalene, bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate, toluene,
phenanthrene, DDT, arsenic, mercury, lead, and cadmium.
 
In May 1984, under a CERCLA Administrative Order, EPA used emergency funds to remove the liquids
and sludges in the ponds, transport the material to a regulated disposal facility, and fill in the ponds.
 
About 3,100 people use wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : A public meeting was held on May 22, 1985, to discuss a remedial investigation/
feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
