NPL Site Narrative for Stringfellow
 
STRINGFELLOW
Glen Avon Heights, California
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Stringfellow Site covers 22 acres in a canyon near Glen Avon
Heights in southern California. From August 1956 to November 1972, an estimated 34 million gallons of
liquid wastes (spent acid, organics, and heavy metals) were dumped into surface impoundments. Heavy
rainfall in the past has led to the release of hazardous wastes into the environment. Both surface water and
ground water are contaminated. In December 1980, the site reverted to the State for failure to pay back
taxes.
 
Early in 1980, EPA's Regional Response Team directed the removal of over 10 million gallons of wastes
from the site. About $828,000, authorized under Section 311 of the Clean Water Act, was spent to
transport wastes, reinforce containment barriers, and repair the truck-loading areas. In 1981, the State
undertook a program of temporary construction to stabilize the site. EPA assisted by awarding a $95,000
Cooperative Agreement (using funds under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act) to California for
design work and additional analyses. After completion of the design, the State began another temporary
construction program involving leachate controls, drainage controls, waste neutralization, and site grading
and capping. Leachate is being hauled to an off-site facility for disposal.
 
This is the top priority site in California.
 
Status (July 1983) : On April 18, 1983, a draft Cooperative Agreement was received at EPA Headquarters.
The agreement requested reimbursement for past State expenditures at the site, a remedial investigation
and feasibility study, initial remedial measures for fencing and controlling erosion, and continued hauling of
leachate to an off-site disposal facility.
 
On April 21, 1983, the Department of Justice, on behalf of EPA, joined with the State to file a suit in U.S.
District Court against 31 parties responsible for wastes associated with the site.
 
In April and May 1983, both EPA and the State took emergency measures to maintain site integrity. These
include temporary fencing, installation of a french drain, sampling, and other interim control measures.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
