NPL Site Narrative for Strother Field
Industrial Park
 
STROTHER FIELD INDUSTRIAL PARK
Cowley County, Kansas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Strother Field Industrial Park covers roughly 2.3 square
miles approximately 4 miles southwest of Winfield and 4 miles north of Arkansas City, Cowley County,
Kansas. The park consists of about 20 industrial and commercial businesses, as well as two inactive solid
waste landfills. The landfills probably also were used for the disposal of various industrial wastes.
 
Samples collected and analyzed by the State (as part of EPA's Synthetic Organic Chemical Survey)
indicated the presence of chlorinated organic chemicals in several wells supplying Strother Field
Industrial Park. The principal contaminants (trichloroethylene, 1,2-dichloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane,
tetrachloroethylene, and 1,1-dichloroethylene) are common industrial solvents known to persist in ground
water. The State collected a second series of samples from the Strother Field Public Water Supply wells,
as well as samples from several private wells in the adjacent community of Hackney, the water distribution
system, influents and effluents from the Strother Field waste water treatment plant, two monitoring wells
on-site, and several off-site control locations (for comparison purposes). The Strother Field Public Water
Supply was discontinued in June 1983. Additional ground water monitoring is underway to determine the
source and off-site migration of the contamination. About 2,300 people use wells within 3 miles of the site
as a source of drinking water.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : On April 9, 1985, the State issued an Administrative Order to General Electric
Co., one of the parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the northern zone of the site. The
order calls for the company to sample soil; monitor ground water; construct a ground water flow model and
use it to help locate, construct, and operate withdrawal wells under the guidance of the State; and submit
a plan for a treatment and disposal system. At this time, two wells and two air-stripping columns to remove
volatile organic compounds are completed. The State is reviewing the company's plan for a permanent
treatment and disposal system.
 
The Strother Field Commission, which owns the site, continues to pump two supply wells to create a cone
of depression in an attempt to prevent off-site migration. The State is sampling off-site monitoring wells and
private wells on a monthly basis.
 
The State issued another Administrative Order in the week of January 13, 1986, to each of the four
potentially responsible parties associated with the southern zone of the site. The four are: General Electric
Co., Greif Brothers Corp., Cessna Aircraft, and Gordon-Piatt Energy Group, Inc. The order requires
General Electric to treat the water from public supply well #8; each of the companies to drill monitoring
wells on the south end of the field; and Greif Brothers Corp., Cessna Aircraft, and Gordon-Piatt Energy
Group, Inc., to submit data on chemical use during the past 20 years.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
