NPL Site Narrative for Suffolk City Landfill
 
SUFFOLK CITY LANDFILL
Suffolk, Virginia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Suffolk City Landfill covers 67 acres on Route 604 within
the City of Suffolk, Virginia. The area is rural and agricultural. The landfill is owned by Suffolk City and
managed by the Suffolk City Public Works Department. It operated during 1967-84 and is now being
closed, which includes covering, grading, and planting.
 
According to the Public Works Department, the unlined landfill received primarily municipal solid waste. In
1983, it received a permit from the Virginia Department of Health to accept municipal wastes. Industries
such as General Electric Co., Dixie Guano Co., and local peanut processing companies may also have
contributed waste, according to Suffolk City records.
 
Of primary concern is the on-site disposal of highly toxic organophosphate pesticides. In 1970, according
to the Public Works Department, Dixie Guano Co. disposed of an estimated 27 tons of cyanophos,
disulfoton, and thimet into a portion of the landfill. EPA analyses in 1986 revealed disulfoton in on-site
ground water and cyanide, cyanophos, and disulfoton in on-site soils and retention basins. An estimated
2,500 people obtain drinking water from private wells within 3 miles of the site. No other source of water is
available.
 
Surface run-off from the site discharges into two unnamed tributaries to the Great Dismal Swamp, a major
fresh water wetland.
 
The site is not completely fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact
with hazardous substances.
 
Status (February 21, 1990) : On June 29, 1989, the City of Suffolk and the Virginia Department of Waste
Management entered into an Administrative Order on Consent under CERCLA Sections 104 and 106. The
order calls for the city to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent
of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
