NPL Site Narrative for Sutton Brook
Disposal Area
 
SUTTON BROOK DISPOSAL AREA
Tewksbury, Massachusetts
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 27, 2000) : The Sutton Brook Disposal Area ("the site"), which is roughly
synonymous with the Rocco's Disposal Area site, is located off South Street on the eastern boundary
of Tewksbury, Middlesex County, Massachusetts. The site is in excess of 50 acres. A small portion of
the site also extends into the Town of Wilmington, Massachusetts. The Sutton Brook Disposal Area is
bounded by a former railroad grade along the northern boundary, beyond which is a former piggery and a
forested area; residential properties to the west; undeveloped woodland and wetlands to the south; and the
Tewksbury/Wilmington Town Line and agricultural land to the east. The site comprises three source areas;
a 50-acre landfill, an area of buried drums, and contaminated soils associated with the drum disposal
area. These three source areas are located on what is known as the Rocco's Disposal Area. Several
additional drum burial areas and suspected disposal areas have recently been identified in the vicinity of
the site and are currently being investigated by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
(MADEP). As additional information becomes available, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
will determine whether these other source areas should be included in the Sutton Brook Disposal Area site.
 
Waste disposal activities at the Sutton Brook Disposal Area can be traced back to at least 1957, when
an area of the site was used as a "burning dump." This area was originally designated by the Tewksbury
Board of Health as a temporary disposal area (landfill). In 1961, the temporary assignment was modified
to require that the landfill on the site be operated as a sanitary landfill, accepting municipal refuse
generated only in the Town of Tewksbury, Massachusetts. The assignment was not complied with, as the
landfill accepted municipal, commercial, and industrial wastes from both inside and outside the Town of
Tewksbury. The owners of the landfill received numerous violation citations from state and local officials for
violating Massachusetts Sanitary Landfill Regulations.
 
In 1966, the Town of Tewksbury was ordered by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (the
Commonwealth) Commissioner of Public Health to operate the landfill using the sanitary landfill method.
However, after 1966, there were documented occurrences of landfill burning, uncovered waste areas, the
filling in of on-site wetlands, wastes disposed below the water table, and landfill slopes which exceeded
operation plans. Due to these violations, the Commonwealth ordered the closure of the landfill in 1979. At
the time of its closure in 1979, the landfill was accepting in excess of 250 tons of waste per day. Despite
the closure order, landfill operations continued until 1982, when official landfill operations were suspended,
but waste acceptance continued through 1988.
 
The area of the landfill is approximately 50 acres. The landfill volume is estimated at approximately 1.9
million cubic yards. During the 1999 EPA Superfund Technical Assistance and Response Team (START)
on-site reconnaissance, a number of erosional cuts, leachate seeps, and collapsed areas were observed
in the cover material of the landfill. Sutton Brook (and associated wetlands) flows east to west through the
property, dividing the landfill into northern and southern lobes. Additional wetlands areas are located south
of the landfill and along the eastern and western portions of the property. Approximately 300 yards south of
the landfill is an unnamed pond, used seasonally for ice skating.
 
In 1983, a loam screening business began operation on the property. On August 11, 1983, during an
inspection by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality Engineering (MADEQE) (currently
MADEP), underground burning was observed through fissures in the ground in the southern landfill lobe.
During a subsequent inspection conducted by MA DEQE personnel on August 12, 1983, flames and
smoke were no longer visible after heavy machinery had covered the fissures with soil. Subsequent
investigations by Tewksbury Health Inspectors and MADEQE documented piles of demolition debris and
soil on areas of the property, in some cases adjacent to and/or encroaching upon on-site wetland areas.
 
Numerous investigations of the site by local, state, and federal organizations have revealed the
presence of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semivolatile organic compounds (SVOCs), pesticides,
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and inorganic elements in on-site and off-site ground water, surface
water, sediment, soil, and VOCs and SVOCs in air samples.
 
Status (June 2001) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
