NPL Site Narrative for Sydney Mine
Sludge Ponds
 
SYDNEY MINE SLUDGE PONDS
Brandon, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Sydney Mine Sludge Ponds cover 2.1 acres in Brandon,
Hillsborough County, Florida. The ponds are part of an old 1,700-acre phosphate strip mine and were
used for storing and dewatering waste clays and tailings from phosphate ore processing. The Hillsborough
County Division of Public Utilities leases the land from American Cyanamid Co. and used two on-site
ponds from 1974 to 1982. The larger pond (1.5 acres) received primarily septic sludge and the smaller
pond (0.6 acre) received the grease trappings from commercial restaurants, industrial cutting oil, and other
types of waste oil. The total volume of wastes in both pits is over 6,000 cubic yards.
 
Tests conducted by EPA in 1979 found arsenic and lead in the septic sludge pond and 1,1,1-
trichloroethane and toluene in the oil pond. EPA also detected 1,1-dichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethylene,
toluene, and benzene in shallow ground water. Over 4,000 persons draw water from wells within 3 miles of
the site.
 
Turkey Creek is contaminated with cadmium, chromium, and lead, according to EPA. The creek is
approximately 0.5 mile east of the site.
 
In response to a closure permit issued by the State, the county has constructed an underground slurry wall
around the ponds to prevent contaminants from escaping and ground water from entering. Also, the county
is pumping out the contaminated ground water within the wall, treating it, and spraying the treated water
onto the ground. Incineration of sludges in the pond is scheduled to begin shortly.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : To date, over 41 million gallons of ground water have been treated and over
10,000 cubic yards of contaminated materials have been excavated and incinerated. Ground water
treatment continues. The county has also skimmed about 3,200 gallons of floating oil from the ponds.
 
Additional sampling in 1986 found several more areas of contaminated soil. As a result, the county treated
about 15,000 cubic yards of soil by on-site air drying and biological treatment. A group of generators who
sent wastes to the site is conducting operation and maintenance activities at the site.
 
EPA is preparing a plan for additional remedial action at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
