NPL Site Narrative for Synertek, Inc.
(Building 1)
 
SYNERTEK, INC. (BUILDING 1)
Santa Clara, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Synertek, Inc. (SI) manufactured electronics in five buildings on
a 3.5-acre site at 3050 Coronado Boulevard in Santa Clara, Santa Clara County, California, from March
1978 to February 1985. SI, a subsidiary of Honeywell, Inc., operated a neutralization system consisting of
three buried tanks during 1974-82. Building 1 is adjacent to the tank system, which was removed in April
1985. A buried tank for storing trichloroethylene (TCE) and trichloroethane (TCA) was installed in 1976
and removed in February 1985. According to California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB)
files, the neutralization tank and solvent storage tank appear to have leaked. In 1985, Honeywell found
TCE, TCA, and other chlorinated solvents in ground water on and off the site. Both the shallow and deep
aquifers are contaminated. An estimated 300,000 people obtain drinking water from public wells within 3
miles of the site.
 
Honeywell is constructing a single-well extraction system to pump contaminated ground water to the
surface, route it through two air-stripping towers to remove contaminants, and discharge the treated water
to the storm sewer. The discharge will be regulated under a permit issued by CRWQCB under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. The pumping system is scheduled to be in operation shortly.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : Under CRWQCB orders, Honeywell is conducting a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action. The work is meeting the schedule outlined in the orders. Honeywell plans to remove a
large concrete neutralization tank in the near future.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
