NPL Site Narrative for T.H. Agriculture &
Nutrition Co. (Montgomery Plant)
 
T.H. AGRICULTURE & NUTRITION CO. (MONTGOMERY PLANT)
Montgomery, Alabama
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : T. H. Agriculture & Nutrition Co. formerly distributed pesticides
from a plant on the Birmingham Highway on the west side of downtown Montgomery, Montgomery County,
Alabama. During the 1970s and possibly late 1960s, the company operated under the name Thompson-
Hayward Chemical Co. The plant closed in 1980. The company changed its name to T. H. Agriculture &
Nutrition Co. in 1981.
 
While the plant was in operation, insecticides, herbicides, and possibly other chemical wastes were buried
in pits and trenches covering about 1 acre of the plant's 11.6 acres. In 1981, the company excavated about
2,900 cubic yards of contaminated soils and wastes and transported them to a hazardous waste facility
regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
Lindane, which the plant distributed, is present in wells on and off the site, according to tests conducted
by the State and others. Montgomery's water supply division has 21 wells within 3 miles of the site. The
system serves an estimated 250,000 people.
 
Prior to Thompson-Hayward's ownership of the plant, a company that handled water treatment chemicals
operated on the site. In 1986, T. H. Agriculture sold the plant site but retained responsibility for site
cleanup. Site ownership has changed frequently since then. Capitol City Insulation, Inc., now occupies the
site.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : EPA conducted a search for parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site. EPA has sent notice letters to the four parties identified informing them of their
potential liability.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
