NPL Site Narrative for T.H. Agriculture &
Nutrition Co. (Albany Plant)
 
T.H. AGRICULTURE & NUTRITION CO. (ALBANY PLANT)
Albany, Georgia
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : T. H. Agriculture & Nutrition Co. formerly formulated and
packaged pesticides on a 7-acre site in Albany, Dougherty County, Georgia. The site is in the suburbs of
Albany in an agricultural area of the State. The company purchased the facility in 1966 from a previous
operator. During the 1970s and possibly late 1960s, the company operated under the name Thompson-
Hayward Chemical Co. The company took the present name in 1981. Formulation operations continued
until 1976. The facility served as a warehouse/distribution center until 1982, when it was closed.
 
Soils and shallow ground water are contaminated with pesticides, including toxaphene, lindane, DDT, and
methyl parathion, according to tests conducted in September 1985 by a consultant to the company. Albany
uses the deep artesian aquifer for drinking water. However, an estimated 3,300 Lee County residents
within 3 miles of the site obtain drinking water from wells drilled into the shallow, contaminated aquifer.
 
Kinchafoonee Creek is less than 1 mile northeast of the site. Kinchafoonee Creek joins Muchalee Creek
and Flint River, which are dammed to form Lake Worth. Lake Worth is used for recreational activities and
to generate hydroelectricity.
 
In 1984, the company transported contaminated soils, debris, and building rubble from the site to a
hazardous waste facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The
Georgia Environmental Protection Division oversaw the action.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for
remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
