NPL Site Narrative for T.H. Agriculture &
Nutrition Co.
 
T.H. AGRICULTURE & NUTRITION CO.
Fresno, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : T. H. Agriculture and Nutrition Co. operated a pesticide-
formulating facility on about 2.5 acres near Fresno, Fresno County, California, from 1962 until 1981. Other
companies had formulated pesticides on the site from 1950 to 1962. During the 1950s and 1960s, on-site
landfills were used for disposal of empty containers, facility trash, and other wastes generated from the
pesticide-formulation operations, including pesticide-laden clays from cleaning of equipment.
 
This site was first proposed for listing under the name "Thompson-Hayward Chemical Co." Thompson-
Hayward Chemical Co. changed its name to T. H. Agriculture and Nutrition Co. in 1981.
 
Sampling conducted by the company and the California Department of Health Services detected pesticides
in soil and ground water at the site. A Cleanup and Abatement Order issued by the California Regional
Water Quality Control Board has directed the company to excavate contaminated soil and determine the
extent of ground water contamination. In response, the company has excavated 14,000 cubic yards of
contaminated soil, and has undertaken sampling to characterize soil contamination, monitor ground water,
and characterize the hydrology beneath the site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : The company has conducted some initial ground water studies on-site and has
proposed an on-site ground water extraction and treatment system. The California Department of Health
Services has ordered the company to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study and to develop an
alternative drinking water supply program.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
