NPL Site Narrative for Taputimu Farm
 
TAPUTIMU FARM
Taputimu, American Samoa
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 23, 1981) : The Taputimu Farm Site is on the Island of Tutuila, Trust
Territory of American Samoa. The site, part of an experimental farm owned by the Territory, consists of
three rooms of a farm warehouse and a trailer that have been used in excess of 10 years for storage of
unused and out-of-date agricultural chemicals and pesticides. Approximately 4,000 pounds of hazardous
wastes are on-site. The chemical storage areas are a short distance from a public beach area, and a
primary concern is that these materials could be transported by flood water to the beach 0.3 mile away.
Direct human contact and contamination of drinking water and marine resources used for food are of
concern.
 
This is the top priority site in American Samoa.
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : In 1982, EPA conducted a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS)
to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
The materials were found to be improperly stored within the buildings. Analysis of the materials identified
several pesticides and chlorinated organic solvents. The materials were stored on a concrete or steel
floor of the storage areas and trailer. Soil sampling and visual examination of the site confirmed that
contamination was confined to the interior floors.
 
Status (March 7, 1986) : In 1984 EPA implemented the remedial action alternative selected. EPA repacked
the chemical/pesticide materials for shipping to the continental United States for disposal in a facility
permitted under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The remedial action also included washing
down all exposed surfaces of the storage areas with bleach to ensure deactivation of any residual
materials not picked up by sweeping and vacuuming. Finally, two layers of epoxy paint were applied to the
interior walls and 3 inches of concrete were poured over the existing floor, thereby eliminating the threat
of direct contact. The Government of American Samoa uses the structure only to store farm equipment
and has placed signs on the building prohibiting food storage. Since all materials were removed and
contaminated surfaces cleaned and sealed, no further monitoring was conducted.
 
This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the Government of American
Samoa, has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under CERCLA has been
implemented, and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
