NPL Site Narrative for Taylor Lumber and
Treating
 
TAYLOR LUMBER AND TREATING
Sheridan, Oregon
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (December 1, 2000) : In order to address the long-term threat to surface water,
sediments, residential soils, and air, the EPA is placing this site on the NPL. The Taylor Lumber and
Treating site is an active wood processing and treating business located approximately 1 mile west of
Sheridan, Oregon. The wood treating facility began operating in autumn 1966. The wood treating facility's
primary functions are to condition and pressure-treat wood products with preservatives in order to prolong
the useful life of the products. Wood products treated at the facility include lumber, poles, pilings, posts,
railroad ties, and plywood. Wood preserving chemicals, which historically have been used at this facility
and are still in use, include petroleum-based creosote and pentachlorophenol (PCP) solutions. The wood
treating chemicals are stored in aboveground storage tanks (ASTs) located in two separate tank farms.
 
Numerous RCRA and NPDES violations have occurred at this site over the past decade. In June and
August 1999, EPA conducted an Integrated Assessment (IA) of the Taylor Lumber and Treating facility.
The IA was conducted in two phases. Phase I of the IA field sampling event was conducted from May
16 through June 11, 1999, and included surface and subsurface soil sampling, ground water sampling,
surface water, and sediment sampling. Phase II of the IA consisted of an air-sampling event which was
conducted from August 18 through August 30, 1999. Results of the IA documented the presence of several
on-site sources of Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA)
hazardous substances including volatile organic compounds (VOCs), SVOCs, pentachlorophenol
(PCP), metals, and dibenzo-p-dioxins/dibenzofuans (dioxins/furans). Further, many of these hazardous
substances were documented to have migrated to surface water, soil, and air targets. Air contamination
is documented up to 1 mile from the site. Actual contamination has also been documented in residential
surface soils for up to a 1/2 mile of the site. Contaminants include barium, lead, mercury, zinc, cadmium,
pyrene, bis(2-ethylexyl)phthalate, and several dioxins.
 
Status (June 2001) : An emergency removal was performed during the fall 2000. Approximately 5,000
tons of contaminated soil was placed in a temporary on-site holding cell. A slurry wall was constructed
around the wood treatment plant and an asphalt cap was placed over the contaminated area to help
contain contaminated groundwater. A surface water treatment plant started operating in November 2000
and several of the drainage ditches were cleaned out.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
