NPL Site Narrative for Teledyne
Semiconductor
 
TELEDYNE SEMICONDUCTOR
Mountain View, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Teledyne Semiconductor has manufactured semiconductors
on a 1-acre site in Mountain View, Santa Clara County, California, since 1962. In December 1982,
Teledyne reported to the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB) that soil and ground
water near an underground storage tank were contaminated with solvents, including trichloroethylene.
An investigation in June 1984 revealed that the contaminants had migrated to the north and affected
approximately 50 private domestic wells. Local agencies and the company have provided alternative
sources of drinking water for the affected residences. About 116,000 people depend on wells within 3 miles
of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
The company is working with CRWQCB to determine the extent of the contamination and to develop
interim hydraulic controls to prevent further migration of the contaminants.
 
The facility received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the company filed Part A of a permit application.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
Status (February 1986) : CRWQCB, in conjunction with EPA and the California Department of Health
Services, is considering various response actions at the site.
 
This site remains in proposed status until EPA implements the appropriate elements of its final policy for
placing RCRA-related sites on the NPL and then applies the policy to this site.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Subsequent investigation revealed that this site is not subject to the Subtitle C
permitting requirements of RCRA. Its score on the Hazard Ranking System, which EPA uses to evaluate
sites for the NPL, is above the cutoff point of 28.50, and EPA received no information that prevents placing
the site on the NPL. Therefore, it is being placed on the NPL.
 
Teledyne is planning on pumping the contaminated ground water in the upper aquifer to the surface for
subsequent treatment.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
