NPL Site Narrative for Tenth Street Dump/
Junkyard
 
TENTH STREET DUMP/JUNKYARD
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Tenth Street Dump/Junkyard covers approximately
3.5 acres on Tenth Street, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma County, Oklahoma. Prior to 1959, the city operated
the site as a landfill. From 1959 to 1979, a private individual used the site as a salvage yard, accepting
materials such as paint thinners, used tires, and old transformers. During this time, a fire destroyed 1,000
tires, perhaps explaining a black tar-like appearance in an area of no vegetation. Another individual now
operates an automobile junkyard at the site.
 
During a site inspection in 1983, EPA observed about 15 drums containing an oily substance. Some were
open, bulging, or rusting.
 
Composite soil samples EPA took at the site contain high levels of PCBs and lead -- as high as 71,446
milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) of PCBs and 5,000 mg/kg of lead. The site is only partially fenced, making
it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with hazardous substances.
 
Soil at the site is relatively permeable. This, along with past waste management practices, threatens
ground water, which is at about 25 feet below the surface. An estimated 30,000 people draw drinking water
from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site, the nearest within 0.25 mile.
 
Surface water is threatened because run-off from the site enters the adjacent North Canadian River.
 
On August 29, 1985, EPA issued a unilateral Administrative Order under CERCLA Section 106(a) against
the present owner of the property and the son of the former operator (deceased) of the salvage yard.
The order directs them to decontaminate and remove junk automobiles; remove and properly dispose
of PCB electrical equipment and drums containing hazardous substances; and install a locked fence,
synthetic liner, and clay cap. The owners did not respond. In late 1985 and early 1986, EPA used CERCLA
emergency removal funds to decontaminate junk automobiles and move them to a nearby location, store
two drums of benzene and four drums of equipment on the site pending disposal at an approved facility,
and fence, cap, and seed the site.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is planning for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type
and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
