NPL Site Narrative for Terry Creek Dredge
Spoil Areas/Hercules Outfall
 
TERRY CREEK DREDGE SPOIL AREAS/HERCULES OUTFALL
Brunswick, Georgia
 
 
The Terry Creek Dredge Spoil Areas/Hercules Outfall site is located in Brunswick, Georgia. The site
consists of four source areas, three disposal areas and the Hercules outfall. The sources border Dupree
Creek, Terry Creek and the Back River. From 1948 through December of 1980 Hercules Inc produced
toxaphene as its principal product. During this period Hercules (formerly known as Hercules Powder
Plant) discharged wastewater directly into Dupree Creek. Areal interpretation of a November 12, 1971
photograph discovered a plume on Dupree Creek emanating from the Hercules outfall. Allegedly in 1966
Hercules Inc released wastewater discharge that contained approximately 250 to 300 pounds of toxaphene
per day.
 
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Savannah District has been involved in dredging Terry and
Dupree Creeks since 1938. Dredged soil had been disposed in three principal areas. Although it is not
clear when, at some time the sediments dredged from Terry and Dupree Creeks were determined to be
contaminated with toxaphene. The largest disposal area used by the USACE during the Terry Creek
Project is approximately 16.7 acres. The impoundment construction was such that sediment and water
were deposited directly into the spoil area. As the solids settle out of the dredge slurry, water was allowed
to drain out of three weirs and back into Terry and Dupree Creeks.
 
In 1995, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 4 conducted an Expanded Site Inspection
(ESI). A total of 45 samples were collected during the ESI, including: two groundwater samples collected
from private wells; 16 surface soil samples; 16 subsurface soil samples; 12 surface water samples, and 17
sediment samples collected from Dupree and Terry Creeks and the Back River. Samples collected from
the impoundment and contaminated dredge areas contained elevated concentrations of toxaphene as well
as the sediments of Dupree Creek, Terry Creek and the Back River.
 
Runoff from the surface impoundment flows north, northeast or toward discharge points into Dupree Creek.
From this point of entry, Dupree Creek flows 0.4 mile where it converges with Terry Creek. Terry Creek
flows east for 1.3 miles and merges with the Back River. The Back River flows south for approximately
1.8 miles where it empties into the St. Simons Sound. The downstream 15-mile surface water migration
pathway terminates in St. Simons Sound. The upstream migration carries runoff and discharge 4,000 feet
north to the origin of Dupree Creek. The entire pathway is a recreational fishery, and a habitat for several
threatened and endangered species.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
