NPL Site Narrative for Texarkana Wood
Preserving Co.
 
TEXARKANA WOOD PRESERVING CO.
Texarkana, Texas
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : Texarkana Wood Preserving Co. operated a wood-processing
plant on a site of about 25 acres in Texarkana, Bowie County, Texas. Operations started in 1961
and ended in July 1984. Creosote and pentachlorophenol were used in a steam/vacuum/pressure
treatment. Approximately 793,000 gallons of hazardous waste are stored on-site in pressure vessels,
steel baffle tanks, retention ponds, surge tanks, and three evaporation ponds. All units have been heavily
contaminated with creosote and pentachlorophenol. The evaporation ponds contain dibenzofuran,
naphthalene, anthracene, phenanthrene, pentachlorophenol, and other contaminants, according to tests
conducted by the Texas Department of Water Resources (TDWR) and EPA. Heavy rains continue to cause
ponds to overflow, eventually reaching Days Creek.
 
The plant is 1,200 feet from the nearest residence. The site is unfenced. Approximately 190 people live
within 3 miles. Contamination may be entering ground water, which is only 4 to 8 feet below the surface.
Ground water is used for domestic, irrigation, industrial, and agricultural purposes. The plant is 800 feet
from Days Creek, the nearest downstream surface water.
 
The plant received three citations from the State for unauthorized discharges of process waste water
into the Days Creek drainage system. Since the company ceased operations, State enforcement actions
ceased and the project was turned over to Superfund for cleanup. On December 4, 1984, after heavy rains,
a contractor for the TDWR Emergency Spill Response Section pumped water from the flooded process
area to a less full evaporation pond.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
