NPL Site Narrative for Thermo-Chem, Inc.
 
THERMO-CHEM, INC.
Muskegon, Michigan
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Thermo-Chem, Inc., formerly operated on a site of about 10
acres in Muskegon, Muskegon County, Michigan. Until August 1980, the company reclaimed solvents such
as trichloroethylene and methylene chloride, paint wastes, and antifreezes. Waste sludges and residues
from the process were incinerated on-site, and waste waters were discharged to a clay-lined lagoon and
two seepage lagoons. At one time, 3,500 drums of waste solvents and a 20,000-gallon tank of liquid waste
contaminated with C-66 (a pesticide residue) were present on-site. The company has since removed them.
 
Soil-gas surveys conducted by the State at the site indicated the presence of methylene chloride,
tetrachloroethylene, carbon tetrachloride, and 1,1,1-trichloroethane.
 
About 10,000 people use wells within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
The operation received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when the owner filed Part A of a permit application for storage tanks.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Since the ground water may be contaminated with compounds present at the site,
the State requested that the company perform a hydrogeological survey. The company has dissolved and
claims not to have assets to undertake the survey.
 
This site is being placed on the NPL at this time because it satisfies a component of the NPL/RCRA policy:
the owner has demonstrated inability to finance appropriate remedial action by invoking bankruptcy laws.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
