NPL Site Narrative for Times Beach
 
TIMES BEACH
Times Beach, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at listing (March 1983) : The City of Times Beach (population 2,800) covers 8 square miles
on the floodplain of the Meramec River in St. Louis County, Missouri. In 1972, and again in 1973, the
City contracted with a waste oil hauler to spray oil on unpaved roads for dust control. It was later learned
that the waste oil contained dioxin. In November and early December 1982, EPA sampled the roads and
right-of-ways in Times Beach. Soon afterward, the Meramec River flooded the City. EPA expedited the
sample analyses and found dioxin at levels from less than 1 part per billion (ppb) to 127 ppb. As a result,
the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) issued a health advisory on December 23, 1982, recommending
that people relocated from Times Beach due to flooding should stay away, and that those remaining should
leave. EPA resampled the area in January 1983 to determine if flood waters had deposited contaminated
soil into homes and yards. In the second week of January, EPA allocated $500,000 to CDC to collect
health questionnaires and examine the people of Times Beach. On February 22, 1983, EPA pledged $33
million from Superfund to purchase the Times Beach property under a relocation plan to be developed and
implemented by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
 
Status (July 1983) : EPA is preparing a Remedial Action Master Plan outlining the investigations needed to
determine the full extent of cleanup required at Times Beach. The next step is a feasibility study to identify
alternatives for remedial action. CDC will continue its questionnaires and examinations and is also working
with EPA to define cleanup levels for dioxin at Times Beach.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
