NPL Site Narrative for Tinker Air Force
Base (Soldier Creek Area/Building 3001)
 
TINKER AIR FORCE BASE (SOLDIER CREEK AREA/BUILDING
3001)
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : Tinker Air Force Base covers 4,277 acres adjacent to Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma County, Oklahoma. The base is within the North Canadian River drainage basin and drains
into Crutcho and Soldier Creeks. It overlies the Garber-Wellington Formation.
 
This NPL site is bounded by 59th Street, Douglas Boulevard, Building 3001, and the base boundary to the
north. Building 3001 is used for aircraft maintenance and jet engine rebuilding. Organic solvents, including
trichloroethylene (TCE), tetrachloroethylene, and 1,2-dichloroethylene, were used for degreasing and
aircraft maintenance. In the past, waste oils, solvents, paint sludges, and plating waste generated from
maintenance activities were disposed in Industrial Waste Pits Numbers 1 and 2, located about 1 mile south
of Soldier Creek and Building 3001.
 
Current waste is disposed off-site at landfills permitted under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) or the State. The base acquired Interim Status under RCRA Subtitle C when it filed an application
for a permit to store hazardous wastes.
 
Tests conducted by a contractor to the Air Force detected TCE in a water supply well located within
Building 3001. The Air Force has taken this well out of service. The municipal water system serving 55,400
customers in Midwest City draws water from the contaminated aquifer within 3 miles of the base. The Air
Force has detected heavy metals (chromium, nickel, cadmium) in Soldier Creek at Douglas Boulevard.
 
The Air Force is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The Air Force has completed Phase I (records search) and is currently involved in
Phase II (problem confirmation).
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Phase IV (Operations Phase) is underway, and work on Phase II continues. Phase
IV includes installation of additional cover at a landfill thought to be contributing contamination to a private
well.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of RCRA. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore,
this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
