NPL Site Narrative for Tobyhanna Army
Depot
 
TOBYHANNA ARMY DEPOT
Tobyhanna, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 14, 1989) : Tobyhanna Army Depot covers 1,293 acres in Tobyhanna,
Monroe County, in the Pocono Mountains of northeastern Pennsylvania. Military operations started on
the site in 1913. The facility assumed its present name in August 1962. The depot's primary mission is to
provide maintenance and supply support to the Army. The depot includes 131 buildings. Metal refinishing,
electronic fabrication, electroplating, and degreasing operations are conducted on-site. All types of depot
wastes, including plating wastes, paints, solvents, sewage treatment sludge, and solid wastes, were
disposed of on-site prior to 1975.
 
Tobyhanna Army Depot is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978.
Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. IRP investigations have focused on two areas in the southeastern section of the
depot: Area B, which consists primarily of a swale/trench containing rusted drum fragments, and Area A,
where pits contain volatile organic compounds and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons.
 
IRP investigations conducted in the southeastern section in 1981 and 1986 found trichloroethylene (TCE)
in on-site monitoring wells, and 1,2-dichloroethylene, TCE, and tetrachloroethylene in on-site and off-site
water supply wells. An estimated 4,300 people obtain drinking water from depot and private wells within 3
miles of hazardous substances on the depot.
 
The Army is conducting a remedial investigation and an endangerment assessment for the portion of the
site contaminating the Village of Tobyhanna's water supply. Future studies are planned for the remainder
of the site.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : The Army is preparing to fill in data gaps in the investigations of Areas A and
B. A treatability study is underway to determine how to clean up soil contamination. Also, the Army is
providing bottled water to people whose wells were contaminated and will soon extend the depot's water
line to provide a permanent water supply.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
