NPL Site Narrative for Toftdahl Drums
 
TOFTDAHL DRUMS
Brush Prairie, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Toftdahl Drums Site covers 15 acres in Brush Prairie,
Clark County, Washington. Up to 200 drums of unknown material may have been buried at the site in the
late 1960s or early 1970s. Many drums reportedly have been removed from the site since that time, but it is
unclear how many may still remain buried, or how much of the contents may have spilled into the ground.
 
In July 1983, EPA excavated and sampled the remains of six drums. High concentrations of metals and
organic contaminants were detected in the material in the drums and adjacent soil. Three private wells
near the site contain low levels of some of these contaminants. The State has said that no health threat
exists at this time to the residents using these wells. Recent discussions between the property owner and
the State have resulted in the identification of several other areas on this property (and one not on the
property) where the contents of the drums may have been spilled on the ground. Recent sampling by the
State has detected no contamination in these areas, but additional sampling is planned.
 
The State is planning to conduct a remedial investigation and excavate the known drum burial area to
remove the remaining drums.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In June 1985, the State excavated the remains of 13 drums from the known drum
burial area. It is believed that all the drums now have been removed from the site.
 
Under a cooperative agreement with EPA, the State of Washington Department of Ecology is currently
conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at
the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Status (December 23, 1988) : This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with
the State of Washington, has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under CERCLA
has been implemented, and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
