NPL Site Narrative for Tomah Fairgrounds
 
TOMAH FAIRGROUNDS
Tomah, Wisconsin
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Tomah Fairgrounds Site covers 10 acres southwest
of Tomah, Monroe County, Wisconsin. From 1953 to 1959, the city operated the site as an open unlined
dump, perhaps with open burning. During this period, the city had a similar operation about 2 miles away
where the Tomah Armory is now located. The Tomah Armory is also being proposed for the NPL at this
time.
 
Both Tomah sites accepted primarily municipal refuse. However, Union Camp Corp. notified EPA, as
required by CERCLA Section 103(c), that its polyethylene plant in Tomah had sent to the dumps up to
23,770 gallons of solvents and heavy metals, including lead and chromium components of ink wastes from
the plant.
 
After the dump to the southwest stopped operating, the city covered the dumping area. The 10 acres
became part of the Tomah Fairgrounds.
 
Tomah Fairgrounds is in a partly rural, partly residential area. An estimated 9,500 people draw drinking
water from public and private wells within 3 miles of the site. The nearest well is about 0.6 mile from the
site.
 
The nearest downslope water, Lake Tomah, is approximately 400 feet from the site. The lake is used
for recreational activities. Because the wastes were inadequately covered and there were no diversion
structures, contaminated run-off from the dump could have reached nearby surface waters.
 
In an inspection conducted in August 1984, EPA observed areas where erosion had worn away some of
the soil, revealing rusted metal. Thus, people and animals can potentially come into direct contact with
hazardous substances.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
