NPL Site Narrative for Tonolli Corp.
 
TONOLLI CORP.
Nesquehoning, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Tonolli Corp. operated on a 20-acre site along Route 54 in
Nesquehoning, Carbon County, Pennsylvania, from 1974 to 1985. The site is a valley in a sparsely
populated area. Tonolli recycled lead batteries, which involved crushing the batteries and recovering
lead and plastic materials. In October 1985, Tonolli filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the Federal
bankruptcy code.
 
On the site at present are a lined landfill containing approximately 84,700 cubic yards of waste and a
surface impoundment for storing contaminated water from plant operations (for example, process water
from the battery crushing and separation operation). Occasionally, liquid from the impoundment has found
its way into the landfill. The impoundment holds waste water containing arsenic, cadmium, lead, and
chromium, according to EPA tests conducted in 1984 and 1987.
 
In 1985, a consultant to Tonolli and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER)
detected arsenic and cadmium in on-site monitoring wells. An estimated 13,000 people obtain drinking
water from Lansford/Coaldale Joint Water Authority wells within 3 miles of the site. The nearest well is
within 1 mile.
 
Tonolli's 1985 tests revealed arsenic, cadmium, and lead in Nesquehoning Creek, which is within 3 miles
downstream of the site.
 
In June 1988, EPA used CERCLA emergency funds to start a removal action involving treating waste
water in the impoundment and a holding tank and returning the treated water to Nesquehoning Creek. The
action is still underway.
 
On November 18, 1980, Tonolli acquired Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA) when it filed a Notification of Hazardous Waste Activity and Part A of a permit
application for a landfill and a surface impoundment. On June 6, 1985, Tonolli submitted a revised Part
A. This RCRA-related site is being proposed for the NPL because it satisfies a component of EPA's NPL/
RCRA policy: the owner has demonstrated inability to finance appropriate remedial action by invoking
bankruptcy laws.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA has identified approximately 400 parties potentially responsible for
wastes associated with the site. The search for potentially responsible parties (PRPs) continues. EPA is
investigating the possibility of the PRPs conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
