NPL Site Narrative for Tracy Defense
Depot (USARMY)
 
TRACY DEFENSE DEPOT (USARMY)
Tracy, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (July 24, 1989) : The Tracy Defense Depot covers 448 acres 1.5 miles
southwest of Tracy, San Joaquin County, California. The area around the depot is primarily grassland
and agricultural. The site has been an Army Supply Depot since it was activated in 1942. In 1963 it was
turned over to the Defense Logistics Agency. Special operations include repacking leaking chemical
containers, fumigation of shipping materials, vehicle maintenance, painting, storage of chemicals, derusting
and preserving of metal parts, operation of chemical and photographic laboratories, storage and mixing of
pesticides, and storage and treatment of liquid and solid wastes.
 
Liquid waste treatment/storage areas include two unlined sewage effluent ponds, two abandoned sewage
lagoons, two lined industrial waste water ponds, an abandoned paint spraying/stripping rinse water pond,
an abandoned trench where 150 drums of lubricating oil reportedly were buried, an unlined pond for
holding storm water, an abandoned pesticide disposal trench, an abandoned area where substantial
amounts of formaldehyde were buried, and aboveground and belowground waste tanks. Also, liquid
wastes were formerly stored on-site in an unpaved area, and solvents, radiological commodities, medical
supplies, and solid and liquid chemicals were disposed of in three burning pits.
 
Former solid waste treatment/storage areas include a fill area where food items were buried, a fill area
where construction material was buried, and three impoundments where wastes containing mercury
phosphate compounds were stored. Currently, all solid hazardous waste is hauled off-site to facilities
regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
Tracy Defense Depot is participating in the Installation Restoration Program (IRP), established in 1978.
Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. In 1985, IRP tests indicated the shallow aquifer below the site, which extends
from 15 feet to 250 feet below the surface, is contaminated with trichloroethylene and tetrachloroethylene.
The water in the aquifer, however, is generally too saline for most uses. Municipal, private, and irrigation
wells are within 3 miles of hazardous substances at the depot. Water from Tracy's municipal well, which is
within 3 miles of the site, is blended with water from other wells and from Delta Mendota Canal to provide
drinking water to an estimated 28,600 people.
 
The Defense Logistics Agency is conducting a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the depot and identify alternatives for remedial action. The State is
reviewing the depot's proposal to undertake an interim remedial measure involving pumping and treating
ground water to remove contamination.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : A public meeting was held in May 1990 on the plan to pump and treat
contaminated ground water. The State is reviewing the depot's draft RI/FS plan.
 
EPA, the State, and the Defense Logistics Agency will negotiate an Interagency Agreement under
CERCLA Section 120 covering response activities at the depot.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
