NPL Site Narrative for Trans Circuits, Inc.
 
TRANS CIRCUITS, INC.
Lake Park, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 22, 1999) : The Trans Circuits, Inc., property is located at 210 Newman
Way in Lake Park, Palm Beach County, Florida. The 1.2-acre property is bordered by Brant Road to the
east, Newman Road to the south, and another industrial property, the Action Bolt property, to the west. The
Trans Circuits property includes a building in its center and a buried, former evaporation/percolation pond
north of the building.
 
Trans Circuits manufactured electronic circuit boards from the late 1970s until approximately June 1985,
when its facility was closed and its treatment systems were dismantled. Operations included stripping,
etching, electroless and electrolytic plating, and nickel and gold plating. Various solvents, acid-based
stripping solutions, and plating solutions containing lead, tin, copper, nickel, fluoride, and cyanide were
used in manufacturing processes at the Trans Circuits facility. The evaporation/percolation pond was
originally constructed in 1981 with a synthetic liner to collect and allow evaporation of electroplating rinse
water. In September 1982, an industrial wastewater treatment system was installed, the liner was partially
removed from the pond, and the remaining liner was punctured to allow percolation of treated wastewater
to ground water.
 
In September 1982, the facility was served with a notice of violation by the Florida Department of
Environmental Regulation (FDER) for operating without a permit, failing to submit monitoring reports to
FDER, and allowing the pond to overflow. In November 1983, following removal and puncturing of the
liner, the Palm Beach County Environmental Control Board adopted an interim order finding that the Trans
Circuits facility was discharging its effluent to ground water without a valid permit. During its operation,
lead, copper, fluoride, tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene, and 1,1,1-trichloroethane were detected in the
plant's discharge to the evaporation/percolation pond.
 
In 1981, EPA sampled the City of Riviera Beach public well field for volatile organic compounds as part of
a study of water supplies in South Florida. Results from this and subsequent sampling events indicated
the presence of chlorinated hydrocarbons in 7 of the 18 wells comprising the well field. These wells and
others were eventually taken out of service. A subsequent investigation of the well field by FDER in 1985
tentatively traced the contamination in one of the wells to the Trans Circuits facility. This well was closed in
1984.
 
An expanded site inspection (ESI) was completed by EPA Region 4 at the facility in January 1998. As
part of the ESI, EPA Region 4 collected 10 surface soil, 35 subsurface soil, and 35 ground water samples.
Soil samples contained elevated levels of several inorganic contaminants, including lead. Subsurface
soil samples collected from the former evaporation/percolation pond contained elevated levels of lead.
Groundwater samples contained elevated concentrations of lead and the chlorinated hydrocarbons,
1,2-dichloroethylene and trichloroethylene. Lead and trichloroethylene had been detected in the plant's
discharge to the evaporation/percolation pond, and 1,2-dichloroethylene, though not detected in the
effluent, is a common degradation product of tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylene, both of which were
detected in the effluent.
 
The aquifer contaminated by hazardous substances attributable to former Trans Circuits operations
serves as the sole source of water for the Riviera Beach and two other public water supply systems in the
vicinity of the site. Riviera Beach operates 25 public water supply wells, Magnolia Park operates 4 wells,
and Seacoast Utilities operates 20 wells within 4 miles of the Trans Circuits site. These 49 wells provide
drinking water for approximately 67,330 people. Other than the Riviera Beach well that was closed in 1984,
no other public supply wells are believed to have been affected by contamination from Trans Circuits to
date.
 
Status (February 2000) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
