NPL Site Narrative for Tri-County Landfill
Co./Waste Management of Illinois, Inc.
 
TRI-COUNTY LANDFILL CO./WASTE MANAGEMENT OF ILLINOIS,
INC.
South Elgin, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 10, 1986) : The Tri-County Landfill Co./Waste Management of Illinois, Inc.,
Site covers approximately 46 acres in South Elgin, Kane County, Illinois. The area was previously part of a
gravel mining operation. The land surrounding the site is predominantly agricultural, although directly west
are the Woodlands I and II landfills owned by Waste Management.
 
The site was originally owned and operated by Tri-County Landfill Co. (1968-73). It had a permit from the
State to accept general municipal refuse. Waste Management of Illinois, Inc., operated the site from 1973
until it closed in 1977. The property owner from 1973 to present is Michigan Avenue National Bank.
 
In May 1984, EPA detected cyanide, benzene, chlorobenzene, and 1,1-dichloroethane in monitoring wells
downgradient of the landfill. Over 10,000 people use wells within 3 miles of the site for drinking water.
This figure includes the towns of Valley View and South Elgin, which are served by municipal systems. A
residential well is 1,800 feet from the site.
 
The Fox River, approximately 1 mile west of the site, is used extensively for fishing and boating. A fresh
water wetland is 1,100 feet from the site.
 
In March 1971, the Elgin Jaycees filed suit against Tri-County Landfill Co. for allegedly violating the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act with respect to "water, soil, leaching, and air pollution." In 1973, the Illinois
Pollution Control Board ruled in favor of the complainants, issuing a penalty and invoking a bond to be
posted to ensure compliance with two Consent Orders resulting from findings in the case. There are no
records indicating further actions.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : After negotiations with Waste Management failed, EPA started planning a
remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and
identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
