NPL Site Narrative for Tri-County Public
Airport
 
TRI-COUNTY PUBLIC AIRPORT
Delavan, Kansas
 
 
The Tri-County Public Airport (TCPA) facility comprises approximately 3.5 square miles and is located
in Delavan, Morris County, Kansas. The site is being proposed to the NPL based on evidence of ground
water contamination by chlorinated solvents, specifically trichlorethylene (TCE) and 1,2-dichloroethene
(DCE). TCE has been detected in privately owned domestic wells within 3 miles of the site at levels above
health-based benchmarks (that is, at levels which the scientific community has determined may pose
health risks).
 
The TCPA was originally constructed as the Herington Army Airfield (HAAF) in 1942 and was officially
declared surplus in 1946. The airfield property and buildings were quit-claimed by deed to the City of
Herington in 1948. Most of the 300 buildings and structures associated with HAAF have been razed
or removed. From 1948 to the present, the site has been used by a number of companies for various
purposes. Operations have included aircraft restoration, plane storage, and manufacturing of farm
implements, black powder, and roofing materials. From 1950 to the early 1960s, Beech Aircraft (Beech)
leased all four hangars and several other buildings at the site. In 1980, the Raytheon Aircraft Company
(RAC) acquired Beech. Operations conducted by Beech at the site consisted of a chromium conversion
coat process, vapor degreasing, painting, paint stripping, wing-tank manufacturing, aircraft refurbishing,
aluminum processing, aircraft starter generator manufacturing, and steel wing-tank shipping container
manufacturing. A wastewater treatment system was used by Beech for treating chromium process
solutions and rinse waters. TCE was used by Beech in vapor degreasers at Hangars 1 and 4. Paint-
stripping wastewater was transferred to a holding pond located to the north of Hangar 1, in or near an area
that is now considered a potential burial area.
 
Several investigations have been conducted at the site, including investigations by the Kansas Department
of Health and Environment (KDHE), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and EPA. The results of the
investigations indicate that ground water has been contaminated with TCE and DCE within 3 miles to the
north and northwest of TCPA, including the entire town of Latimer, Kansas. TCE has been detected in
ground water samples collected from private wells within this distance at concentrations ranging from 3
micrograms per liter (µg/L) to 280 µg/L. TCE concentrations in 21of the 23 private wells sampled exceeded
the 5 µg/L maximum contaminant level (MCL) established by EPA as the highest permissible level of TCE
allowed in drinking water. The highest concentration of TCE in a sample from a drinking water well (56 µg/
L) was collected from the nearest private property directly north of TCPA.
 
Four separate ground water aquifers lie beneath the site. These aquifers are used for private drinking
water and agricultural purposes. No municipal systems draw ground water from within 4 miles of the
airfield; however, 92 private wells have been identified within this area. All the aquifers known to be used in
the vicinity of TCPA have been shown to be contaminated with TCE. EPA and KDHE have provided bottled
water or whole house filtration systems to 15 affected homes.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
