NPL Site Narrative for Tri-City Disposal
Co.
 
TRI-CITY DISPOSAL CO.
Shepherdsville, Kentucky
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Tri-City Disposal Co. formerly operated a 57-acre industrial
landfill on a broad ridgetop northwest of Shepherdsville in rural northern Bullitt County, Kentucky. During
approximately 1964-68, wastes from Louisville area industries, including Ford Motor Co. and General
Electric Co., were accepted, according to files of the Kentucky Division of Waste Management (KDWM).
In 1968, State officials reported that highly volatile liquid wastes resembling paint thinners were disposed
of on-site. A 1968 aerial photograph suggests that several hundred drums were on the surface and others
were buried. At the time the site was in operation, no State or Federal permit was required. A number of
small farms are now located over the old disposal area.
 
In an April 1987 inspection, KDWM found drums exposed on the ground. The drums contained phenol, 4-
methylphenol, and 2,4-dimethylphenol. PCBs were found in soil, tetrachloroethylene in a well, and lead
in sediment from a small feeder spring/creek of an intermittent stream. An estimated 1,600 people obtain
drinking water from springs and wells within 3 miles of the site.
 
Brushy Fork of Knob Creek is 2,200 feet downslope of the site. Both are used for livestock watering and
recreational activities.
 
Using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA provided alternate water supplies in May 1988 to nearby residents
whose springs were contaminated.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is now transporting drums and contaminated soil to a hazardous waste
facility regulated under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 
EPA's preliminary plan for fiscal year 1989 includes a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
