NPL Site Narrative for Tronic Plating Co.,
Inc.
 
TRONIC PLATING CO., INC.
Farmingdale, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Tronic Plating Co., Inc. occupies 0.5 acre in Farmingdale,
New York. The site is in southwestern Suffolk County, approximately 1.5 miles east of the Nassau County
line. Tronic occupies the southeast corner of a long building in an industrial park area. The site consists of
the building, two inside above-ground storage tanks, four underground leaching pools, and a storm drain in
the paved area to the northeast of the building. Tronic has provided electroplating and anodizing services
to the electronics industry since July 1968.
 
State and county authorities have determined that hazardous wastes, consisting primarily of heavy metals,
were discharged from storage tanks and leaching pools on the site. The State issued a Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit to Tronic on April 1, 1980. In June 1980, the State issued a Consent Order to
Tronic for discharging industrial wastes to ground water from leaching pools. Tronic agreed to obtain a
permit and clean out the leaching pools.
 
Tests conducted by the State on one of the leaching pools detected copper, silver, iron, zinc, lead, and
cadmium. Heavy metals also were detected in the storm drain.
 
The site is in a generally flat area with an average slope of less than 3 percent. There is no surface
water in the vicinity. The surrounding area is paved, and run-off flows to existing storm drains. The site
is surrounded by manufacturing and commercial facilities. Large cemeteries are located to the south and
east.
 
Wells within 3 miles of the site provide drinking water to about 16,000 people and are the only water supply
in the area.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
