NPL Site Narrative for Tucson
International Airport Area
 
TUCSON INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT AREA
Tucson, Arizona
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : The Tucson Airport Area Site covers about 24 square miles in a
southwestern section of Tucson in Pima County, Arizona. The site encompasses the Tucson International
Airport, Air Force Plant #44, portions of the San Xavier Indian Reservation, and residential areas of South
Tucson west of the airport. Ground water at the site is contaminated with organic and metallic compounds,
primarily trichloroethylene (TCE) and hexavalent chromium.
 
The ground water underlying the site is part of the Santa Cruz Basin, the aquifer Tucson uses as its
principal source of water. The Tucson area, with a population of 517,000, is one of the largest metropolitan
areas in the country that is totally dependent on ground water for its drinking water.
 
Status (July 1983) : A preliminary investigation conducted by EPA, the State, and the city confirmed only
one source of contamination: Air Force Plant #44, a missile manufacturing facility owned by the Air Force
and operated by Hughes Aircraft.
 
In negotiations with EPA, the State, and the city, the Air Force agreed to take the necessary actions to
clean up the contamination caused by the plant. In the portion of the site north of Los Reales Road, the
extent and sources of the contamination are as yet unknown. The State has received $581,000 in CERCLA
funds under a Cooperative Agreement with EPA to complete the investigation to identify the extent and
sources of the contamination.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
