NPL Site Narrative for Tulsa Fuel and
Manufacturing
 
TULSA FUEL AND MANUFACTURING
Collinsville, Oklahoma
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 29, 1998) : The Tulsa Fuel and Manufacturing site is located
on the west side of Old Highway 169, approximately 1 and 1/3 miles south of the downtown area of
Collinsville, Oklahoma. The city of Collinsville, is approximately 12 miles north of Tulsa, in northeast
Oklahoma. Surrounding the site are undeveloped, vacant properties to the north and west, a man-made
pond ("southern pond") and remains of a strip mine to the south, and Old Highway 169 and railroad tracks
to the east.
 
The site operated as a zinc smelter and lead roaster from 1914 through 1925. Little is known about
operations or waste management at the facility, although historic maps show mechanical kilns, furnaces,
ore storage bins, and a large reservoir were once present at the site. In addition, one residence is located
onsite. The majority of the facility structures have been demolished, and the site is covered with a large pile
of waste that consists of broken retorts, condensers, slag, building debris, ash, and other material derived
from the former smelter. The waste pile covers approximately 7 acres, and varies in thickness from 2 to
greater than 6 feet. The pile is not covered, nor is there a run-off management system. The waste pile
borders a man-made pond (southern pond) on site, and portions of the waste have collapsed into the pond.
The man-made pond is a fishery and flows into an intermittent drainage ditch ("eastern wetlands") that
borders the eastern edge of the site and waste pile.
 
Samples were collected from the site and surrounding areas during a 1994 EPA Site Investigation
conducted by the State of Oklahoma, Department of Environmental Quality. Samples collected from
the waste pile revealed significantly high concentrations of arsenic, cadmium, cobalt, copper, lead,
manganese, nickel, silver, and zinc. Sediment and surface water samples collected from the southern
pond and eastern wetlands document releases of arsenic, cadmium, copper, lead, silver, and zinc from the
waste pile to the surface water.
 
Status (January 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
