NPL Site Narrative for Twin Cities Air
Force Reserve Base (Small Arms Range
Landfill)
 
TWIN CITIES AIR FORCE RESERVE BASE (SMALL ARMS RANGE
LANDFILL)
Minneapolis, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : Twin Cities Air Force Reserve Base, in Minneapolis,
Hennepin County, Minnesota, is located within and adjacent to the Minneapolis-St. Paul International
Airport complex. Since the beginning of military operations in 1944, activities at the base in support
of mission operations have resulted in a number of areas used for storage and disposal of hazardous
substances. Major industrial operations include various maintenance shops (aircraft, aerospace ground
equipment, and vehicles) and corrosion control shops. These activities generate varying quantities of
contaminated fuels, spent solvents, cleaners, and paint wastes containing trivalent chromium, lead, zinc,
and 1,2-trans-dichloroethylene.
 
This NPL site is the Small Arms Range Landfill, the main base landfill from approximately 1963 to 1972.
The site is along the Minnesota River and covers 2 to 3 acres. In addition to general base refuse, quantities
of paint sludge (primarily paint thinners, paint removers, and miscellaneous paints, primers, lacquers, and
enamels), paint filters (containing chromium), and leaded-fuel sludge were also disposed of at the landfill.
 
A monitoring well on the landfill contains trans-1,2-dichloroethylene significantly above background
concentrations, according to tests conducted by an Air Force contractor. The site is periodically flooded,
which has resulted in release of trivalent chromium, lead, and zinc to the Minnesota River. The northern
boundary of the Minnesota Valley National Wildlife Refuge lies 500 feet from the landfill. An estimated
64,700 people living in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area depend on public and private wells
within 3 miles of the site for drinking water.
 
Twin Cities Air Force Reserve Base is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established
in 1978. Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up
contamination from hazardous materials. The Air Force completed Phase I (records search) in March
1983. Phase II (hydrogeological investigation) is underway.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Phase II continues.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
