NPL Site Narrative for Tyndall Air Force
Base
 
TYNDALL AIR FORCE BASE
Panama City, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 1996) : Tyndall Air Force Base is located approximately 1 mile southeast of
Panama City, Bay County, Florida. Tyndall Air Force Base covers 28,800 acres. The base is located on a
peninsula between East Bay to the northeast, St. Andrew Bay to the northwest, and St. Andrew Bay and
the Gulf of Mexico to the south and southeast.
 
The base was activated in 1941 as a flexible gunnery school for the Army Air Corps and sponsored an
air tactical training school in 1946. In 1950, the base began training all-weather jet interceptor pilots
and aircraft controllers. Under the Air Defense Command, the base shifted its mission in 1957 to focus
on weapons training and system evaluation, tactics, techniques, and equipment testing and tactical air
defense. In 1981, the 325th Fighter Weapons Wing, later renamed the 325th Tactical Training Wing, was
established at the base. In September 1991, the base became an Air Combat Command facility.
 
In October 1985, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) personnel conducted sediment sampling
throughout St. Andrew Bay, including Shoal Point Bayou (Fred Bayou), which is located at the base.
Analyses of the sediment samples collected from Shoal Point Bayou identified the presence of DDD,
DDE, and DDT, which were detected at levels comparatively greater than levels of DDT found in sediment
samples collected from any other locations in St. Andrew Bay. In July 1990, USFWS personnel returned to
Shoal Point Bayou and collected additional sediment samples. Analyses of the sediment samples identified
the presence of DDD, DDE, and DDT. In July 1990 and June 1992, the Air Force collected sediment
samples in Shoal Point Bayou; analyses of these samples also confirmed the presence of DDD, DDE, and
DDT. The base used DDT from an unknown point in time until the early 1970s. All DDT was shipped off
the base by 1975. DDT was primarily stored on the base in the vicinity of the west branch of Shoal Point
Bayou. In March 1993, the base collected soil samples from areas directly north and south of the west
branch of Shoal Point Bayou. Analyses of the soil samples indicated the presence of chlordane, DDD,
DDE, and DDT.
 
Approximately 2,000 feet of wetlands line Shoal Point Bayou. Sediments contaminated with DDD, DDE,
and DDT are located contiguous to some of the wetlands. In December 1993, the base posted a catch-
and-release advisory for Shoal Point Bayou. Prior to the catch-and-release advisory, Shoal Point Bayou
was recreationally fished.
 
Status (April 1997) : Additional soil and sediment sampling is currently being conducted at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
