NPL Site Narrative for UGI Columbia Gas
Plant
 
UGI COLUMBIA GAS PLANT
Columbia, Pennsylvania
 
 
UGI Columbia Gas Plant is a 1.6-acre site located on Front Street in Columbia, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania. From approximately 1853 to 1935, Columbia Gas used the site for gas manufacturing.
Ownership of the property was transferred to Pennsylvania Power and Light (PP&L) in 1935, and the
Lancaster County Gas Company in 1949. Lancaster County Gas merged with UGI Corporation and
occupied the site until 1976, when the land was privately purchased. The property is currently used as a
boat dealership. The land surrounding the site is predominantly residential. The Susquehanna River is
located approximately 400 feet southwest of the site.
 
The primary sources of contamination at the site include the gas holder, the relief holder pit, and a
4,200 square-foot area of contaminated soil. The main waste streams consist of tar and purifier wastes.
Hazardous substances associated with the contaminant sources and waste streams include volatile
organic compounds (VOCs), semi-volatile organic compounds (semi-VOCs), polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs), heavy metals, and cyanide. During operation of the site, overflows from an onsite
tar separator were directed to an open ditch that led to the Susquehanna River. Records show that local
fishermen complained to the plant that their boats were being covered with tar.
 
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PADER) conducted a preliminary assessment
of the UGI Columbia Gas Plant site in August 1984. In 1985, PP&L and UGI Corp. conducted a field
investigation to determine the nature and extent of contamination at the site. Tar was encountered in test
pits dug in the gas and relief holders and in several other test pit and boring areas onsite. Soil, sediment,
sludge, tar, and ground water samples collected during this investigation revealed VOCs, semi-VOCs,
heavy metals, and cyanide contamination. An area of Susquehanna River sediments directly downstream
of the site was found to contain tar-related contaminants such as PAHs and cyanide.
 
In 1987, PP&L and UGI recovered approximately 100 cubic yards of tar-contaminated material which
had been pushed into a railroad pedestrian tunnel bordering the site. They disposed of the tar sludge in
a facility permitted under EPA's Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Also during 1987, it
was determined that approximately 80 cubic yards of sediment southwest and directly downstream of the
site were contaminated with tar from the tar separator and open ditch. In January 1991 EPA conducted
an expanded site inspection of the UGI Columbia Gas Plant. The ground water, soil, and surface water
samples from the Susquehanna River confirmed previously reported contamination of VOCs, semi-
VOCs, PAHs, and cyanide. Within 15 miles downstream of the site, approximately 90 people use the
Susquehanna River as a source of drinking water. Approximately 1,000 people use ground water wells
within 4 miles of the site for water.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
