NPL Site Narrative for Umatilla Army
Depot (Lagoons)
 
UMATILLA ARMY DEPOT (LAGOONS)
Hermiston, Oregon
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Since 1941, Umatilla Army Depot Activity has occupied
about 20,000 acres in northeastern Oregon 6 miles south of the Columbia River in Hermiston, Umatilla
County. This NPL site consists of lagoons covering about 0.5 acre. They are contaminated with wastes
from explosives as a result of past demilitarization and disposal operations. The major contaminants
identified on the base include explosive-derived wastes (RDX, TNT, and nitrate), pesticides (DDT and
lindane), organic solvents (tetrachloroethylene and trichloroethylene), and caustic brine. RDX and nitrates
are present in ground water beneath the lagoons. This ground water contamination might affect public
water supplies serving about 24 people.
 
The Umatilla Army Depot is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978.
Under this program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination
from hazardous materials. The Army has completed Phase I (records search) and Phase II (preliminary
survey).
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : The Department of the Army has developed a draft generic Environmental Impact
Statement (EIS) and public notice under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). The EIS evaluates
alternatives for destroying obsolete chemical agents by 1994 as mandated by the Department of Defense
Authorization Act of 1986. One of the alternatives involves constructing and operating eight incinerator
complexes within the continental U.S., including one at the Umatilla Army Depot. Consequently, in late
1986, Umatilla Army Depot submitted a Part B application for a chemical agent incinerator complex under
Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). When issued, the permit would
address any releases of hazardous waste or hazardous constituents from solid waste management units
on the facility.
 
Within the boundaries of this Federal facility, there are areas subject to the Subtitle C corrective action
authorities of RCRA. However, no such areas were included in scoring this specific site. Therefore,
this Federal facility site is being placed on the Federal section of the NPL under the NPL/RCRA policy
announced on September 8, 1983 (48 FR 40662).
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
