NPL Site Narrative for Union Pacific
Railroad Co. Tie-Treating Plant
 
UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD CO. TIE-TREATING PLANT
The Dalles, Oregon
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 26, 1989) : The Union Pacific Railroad Co. Tie-Treating Plant covers
83 acres in a mixed commercial and residential area just south of the Columbia River in the City of The
Dalles, Wasco County, Oregon. Union Pacific owned the wood treatment facility from 1926 to late 1987,
when equipment and structures were purchased by Kerr-McGee Chemical Corp.; however, Union Pacific
retained ownership of the land and responsibility for all pre-1987 contamination of facility soil and ground
water. The plant primarily treated railroad ties for Union Pacific, but also treated wood for other commercial
users across the United States. From 1959 to November 1987, J. H. Baxter Co. operated the plant for
Union Pacific.
 
The facility treated wood with ammoniacal copper arsenate, creosote, a creosote/fuel oil mixture, and
pentachlorophenol. Spills of treatment solutions on-site and waste water ponds no longer in use are
thought to be the main source of contamination of soil and ground water. Improvements in the waste water
treatment system allow the site to operate as a zero discharge facility.
 
In 1984, Union Pacific began a comprehensive investigation of soil and ground water at the site. Creosote
components, pentachlorophenol, fuel oil, ammonia, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and arsenic are
the major contaminants found in soil and ground water at the site. Contamination by arsenic and VOCs
is greatest in the shallow and intermediate aquifers beneath the site. Organic contaminants, including
phenanthrene and naphthalene, have been detected in the two deep confined aquifers beneath the
site. Ground water is used by over 11,000 people within 3 miles of the site. The Dalles has increased its
monitoring of the municipal supply wells.
 
In May 1989, Union Pacific signed a Consent Order with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality
(DEQ) and agreed to undertake a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and
extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action. The RI/FS is scheduled to
be completed by mid-1991.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : DEQ approved Union Pacific's workplan for the RI/FS in January 1990. The
investigation is now underway.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
