NPL Site Narrative for United Metals, Inc.
 
UNITED METALS, INC.
Marianna, Florida
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 5, 2002) : The United Metals, Inc., site is located in Marianna,
Jackson County, Florida, approximately 2.5 miles south of Interstate 10 and approximately 1,000 feet
east of State Road 71. The site, which is now abandoned, was used primarily as a lead-acid and nickel-
cadmium battery reclamation facility. The site is being proposed to the NPL because a release of lead,
chromium, and other metals has been documented in facility soils, in a nearby wetland, and in a habitat
used by a Federally threatened species. The release also poses a threat to a downstream recreational
fishery and additional wetland areas.
 
From 1979 until 1991, United Metals, Inc., processed and recycled used batteries within a 24-acre fenced
area at its Marianna facility. In 1981, the facility processed as many as 10,000 to 12,000 batteries per
week, resulting in 2,500 gallons of acidic wastes per day. Until sometime in the early 1980s, treated and
possibly untreated wastewater from the recycling process flowed into a settling basin, then into concrete
basins, and finally through a ditch to an unlined holding pond. A second holding pond was constructed to
provide additional capacity, but allegedly was never used. The wastewater system eventually was modified
so that the wastewater was stored in tanks, eliminating the discharge to the holding pond. The holding
ponds subsequently were abandoned, dredged, and backfilled. Dredged sediments from the holding ponds
and from contaminated drainage ditches currently are stockpiled in the recycling building on site.
 
During the 1980s, the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (FDER) conducted several
inspections at the facility. In August 1981, FDER and United Metals, Inc., entered into a Consent Order
that required numerous actions to be undertaken by United Metals, including payment of a fine, submittal
of a detailed plan evaluating the wastewater system, identification of environmental problems, completion
of a limited ground water assessment, and proposal of corrective actions. In July 1986, EPA conducted a
RCRA program inspection. EPA noted that RCRA violations persisted, including improper closure of the
holding ponds following sediment removal, improper storage of hazardous wastes, inadequate ground
water monitoring, and operating without appropriate permits for hazardous waste storage and treatment.
As a result of these violations, EPA issued an Amended Complaint and Compliance Order.
 
United Metals, Inc., discontinued recycling operations and sold the facility to Anrich Industries, Inc. Anrich
subsequently renovated the facility and began battery cracking operations in May 1991. On May 22, 1991,
the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) conducted a Hazardous Waste Inspection
of the facility. FDEP noted several RCRA violations and, in July 1991, ordered that all operations cease.
In June 1993, a Site Inspection was conducted that included the collection of 15 soil samples and the
installation of five monitoring wells. Soil samples collected from the facility production area and drainage
ditches were found to be contaminated with lead. In 1994, an Expanded Site Investigation confirmed the
presence of lead at significant levels in facility soils and in the drainage ditch that flows into the wetland
area.
 
In March 1995, the EPA Removal Assessment Team conducted a site visit to determine the site's eligibility
for a removal action. EPA collected six surface soils samples, four waste samples from 55-gallon drums
and three storage tanks, and two water samples to identify the nature and extent of contamination and to
identify the immediate threat to the public and environment. Lead was detected in soils, a flammable liquid
was discovered in drums, and 800 gallons of sulfuric acid was found in an on-site storage tank. As a result
of these findings, EPA initiated limited removal activities in January 1996, and returned in March 1996 to
complete the removal.
 
The main area of concern at the United Metals, Inc., facility is contaminated soil where the battery recycling
activities were performed, as well as contaminated soil along the drainage route to the wetland area
located west of the facility. Metals contamination has been documented in the wetland, which also serves
as a habitat for the Flatwoods Salamander, a Federally threatened species.
 
Status (April 2003) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
