NPL Site Narrative for United States
Avenue Burn
 
UNITED STATES AVENUE BURN
Gibbsboro, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 29, 1998) : The United States Avenue Burn site is situated in
the vicinity of United States Avenue, Gibbsboro, New Jersey. The three sources, the Burn Area, the
Burn Landfill, and the Railroad Track, are located on contiguous properties east of Bridgewood Lake in
Gibbsboro. The source areas are within the Cooper River drainage basin and the White Sand Branch and
Haney Run streams flow across the site into the Bridgewood Lake.
 
From the mid 1800s to 1967, John Lucas & Company operated a paint manufacturing facility at a separate
location in Gibbsboro. The Lucas manufacturing operations were acquired by the Sherwin-Williams
Company in 1967, who operated the facility until its closure in 1977. The Burn Area source was used as
disposal and burn site for paint wastes generated at the manufacturing facility. Reports indicate that paint
wastes and solvents were dumped and/or poured onto the ground surface at the source location and then
burned. The Burn Landfill was used for the disposal of paint wastes, municipal waste and the storage
of sludges generated from the former paint manufacturing facility's wastewater treatment plant. During
investigations of the Burn Area and Burn Landfill sources, representatives from the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) notified the Sherwin-Williams Company of the existence of discolored soils
along a section of the Railroad Track. Subsequent investigations confirmed the presence of paint wastes
disposed of at the location of the Railroad Track source.
 
The initial investigation of the site was conducted by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection in May of 1994. Samples of paint waste, soil and sediments noted contamination at the source
locations and documented a release to sediments in the White Sand Branch. In response to these findings,
Sherwin-Williams installed a fence around the visible waste associated with Burn Area source. A wetlands
delineation performed for the installation of the fence concluded that part of the Burn Area source is
situated in wetlands. In September 1995, the EPA entered into an Administrative Order of Consent
agreement with the Sherwin-Williams Company to perform a Removal Action Investigation of the U.S.
Avenue Burn Site. Paint waste, soil, surface water and sediment samples were collected from numerous
locations across the site to characterize the extent of contamination. Inorganic hazardous substances
were detected at concentrations significantly above background levels in waste, soil and sediment media
sampled from the site. The presence of the Burn Area source within wetlands and analytical results of
sediments samples collected downstream of the source, documented the actual contamination of wetlands
and a sensitive environment.
 
Status (July 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
