NPL Site Narrative for United Chrome
Products, Inc.
 
UNITED CHROME PRODUCTS, INC.
Corvallis, Oregon
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : From 1960 through 1977, United Chrome Products, Inc.,
discharged an unknown quantity of chrome plating waste water into a dry well on a 2.5-acre site in
Corvallis, Oregon. The facility continues plating operations on the site. Soil on the site, as well as
sediments and water in adjacent surface drainages, including Booneville Slough, are contaminated with
chromium, according to analyses conducted by the State and EPA. The level in Booneville Slough exceeds
Oregon water quality standards and EPA recommended water quality criteria. An aquifer is beneath the
site at 30 feet. The City of Corvallis supplies drinking water from this aquifer to the Airport Industrial Park.
The effects of United Chrome's waste disposal practices on the aquifer are unknown at this time.
 
In early 1983, the State conducted a field investigation, which included sampling of soil and run-off at the
facility, surface water and sediment in local drainages leading to the Willamette River, and four nearby
wells. In June 1983, EPA drilled five additional deep wells into the aquifer to determine ground water flow.
 
Status (June 1984) : Analyses of ground water samples taken in the summer of 1983 and in January 1984
show significant levels of chromium in the shallow zone around the dry well and lower levels in two of the
five deep wells. Local city and private drinking water wells were also sampled in January 1984 and showed
levels of chromium and lead well below maximum contaminant levels. Additional studies are planned to
further define the extent of contamination.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
