OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST  (NPL)   
***NPL Site*** March 2022 
       UNITY AUTO MART Unity, Wisconsin Marathon County 
 
 Site Location: The Unity Auto Mart site consists of chlorinated solvent contamination in groundwater originating from the Unity Auto Mart, a former dry cleaner, located in Unity, Marathon County, in central Wisconsin.   Site History: Unity Auto Mart (UAM) is a former gas station/convenience store, coin- operated laundromat, and dry cleaner. UAM first started as gasoline station in the early 1960s. A dry- cleaning business was added later and operated between 1979  to 1984. The UAM gas station changed hands several times, remaining open until 2012. The property is now vacant and tax-delinquent. The state of Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) first identified chlorinated solvents at the UAM property in 1999. By 2014, WDNR requested EPA’s assistance when numerous potable private wells in the  Village of Unity were discovered to be contaminated with tetrachloroethene (PCE) and its breakdown products.   Site Contamination/Contaminants: The chlorinated solvents found in drinking water wells include PCE and its breakdown products, trichloroethylene (TCE), cis- and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene (1,2-DCE), and vinyl chloride. To date, the chlorinated plume has contaminated 17 private wells, including eight wells with levels above the Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Levels  (MCLs).   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: The contamination plume is currently estimated to span approximately 25 acres. Studies confirm that the contamination has reached the two aquifers that supply drinking water to the area. At least 17 private wells contain chlorinated  substances and approximately 235 residents within half a mile of the site are at risk. Most residents within a 4-mile radius of the Unity Auto Mart facility rely on  private groundwater wells for drinking.   Response Activities (to date): 
 
WDNR provided carbon filters or alternate water supplies to residents whose drinking water wells contained PCE and  TCE exceeding standards. The EPA has assisted WDNR with monitoring and delineating the extent of contamination. 
 
 Need for NPL Listing: The s
 tate of Wisconsin referred the site to the EPA because substantial investigations and long-term cleanup are required. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of  support for placing this site on the NPL from the state. 
      
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs  
can be found on 
the Internet at https:// www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
