NPL Site Narrative for United Creosoting
Co.
 
UNITED CREOSOTING CO.
Conroe, Texas
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : United Creosoting Co. operated a wood-preservation facility
prior to 1975 on a 50.7-acre site in Conroe, Montgomery County, Texas. The original site was subdivided
and later sold to Conroe Construction Co., Clarke Bottling Co., and developers of Tanglewood East
Subdivision.
 
Aerial photographs dated 1958, 1968, 1975, and 1979 show the sequence of events from the wood-
treating operations to abandonment and then redevelopment. The photos clearly outline the boundary of
two ponds used in the wood-preservation process. The major portion of the larger pond lies on property
now owned by Clarke Bottling Co. A portion of the pond appears to be under several lots of a new
subdivision.
 
EPA has identified pentachlorophenol and toluene in the pond. Ground water is contaminated with
naphthalene, methylene naphthalene, and dibenzofuran. Run-off from contaminated areas moves through
Tanglewood Subdivision to the west.
 
Status (June 1984) : In January 1984, Clarke Distributing Co., under an Administrative Order by EPA,
constructed a clay cap and drainage diversion berms to mitigate the run-off problem. EPA has awarded a
Cooperative Agreement to the State for a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and
extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
Soil sampling in December 1983 indicated levels of dibenzo-p-dioxins of the octa, hepta, and hexa
varieties. These were further analyzed for three isomers of the hexa variety. The laboratory reported only
the presence of the 123678 isomer at a range of 0.7 to 3.7 parts per billion. Dust samples from homes
were taken March 12, 1984, and analyzed for pentachlorophenol (PCP) and three isomers of the hexa
variety dioxin under a sampling plan coordinated with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control. The interior
samples indicated the presence of up to 1 part per million PCP and no detectable levels of dioxin.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
