 
  
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** September 2016 
 VALLEY PIKE VOC s Riverside , Ohio   
 Montgomery  County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Valley Pike VOCs site, located in Riverside, Ohio, is comprised of ground water and soil contaminated with volatile organic compounds (VOCs). A residential neighborhood at the site has been affected by vapor intrusion from the contaminated ground water plume. The neighborhood is located approximately 900 feet southwest of the Mullins Rubber Products, Inc. (MRP) facility and includes approximately 500 residences. 
 
 Site History: 
MRP, an active business, began operations in 1942 as Mullins Tire and Rubber Company. The primary operation at that time was retreading used tires. In 1955, the business expanded from tires into mol ding rubber products.  Beginning in the mid-1960s, the company focused on molding heavy duty truck/trailer suspension bushings, the product line that continues today. As part of MRP’s manufacturing process, VOCs were used to degrease certain metal parts.  
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
Ground water, soil and indoor air have been contaminated by VOCs, including tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and trichloroethylene (TCE).
 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
Ground water contamination has spread to  the Grand Miami Buried Valley (GMBV) aquifer system . The site is located near the Dayton Mad River Well Field to the south, and the D ayton Miami Well Field to the west. Collectively, these well fields provide drinking water for approximately 400,000 residents. 
 
 Response Activities (to date): 
Over the last several years, the EPA has coordinated with the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency to investigate and respond to the contamination at the site. Results from these investigations indicate that indoor air in  certain residences at the site have been contaminated by VOCs above health-based screening levels. Approximately 400 residences have been sampled for vapor intrusion (sub-slab or indoor air) by the EPA’s Superfund Removal Program and 91 residences were found to exceed the Ohio Department of Health screening level . EPA’s Removal Program has installed vapor mitigation systems at 90 homes to date. In January 2016, MRP agreed to conduct further evaluation and mitigation of residential vapor intrusion  and conduct a source removal action.  
 Need for NPL Listing: 
This site was referred to the EPA by the state due to the VOC plume, potential for contaminated drinking water , and vapor intrusion into residential homes . Although MRP and the EPA have recently agreed to actions to mitigate vapor intrusion impacts, without remediation of the contaminated ground water plume , the contamination may continue to spread. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Ohio.   
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
 
