NPL Site Narrative for Van Dale Junkyard
 
VAN DALE JUNKYARD
Marietta, Ohio
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Van Dale Junkyard covers about 10 acres northeast
of Marietta, Washington County, Ohio. It is on a ridge near Duck Creek, a tributary to the Ohio River. The
owner was licensed by the county to receive junk for salvage. In addition, the owner accepted hundreds
of drums containing waste dyes and organic chemicals. As a result of the facility's geology and poor
management practices, the creek, sediments, and an adjacent marshy area are contaminated with organic
chemicals and metals, according to tests conducted by EPA and the State. Additionally, the potential exists
for contamination of local private wells serving about 20 people.
 
The Ohio Attorney General filed a suit against the owner/operator of the facility on January 13, 1984.
On February 29, 1984, the owner/operator agreed to a Preliminary Injunction enjoining the facility from
accepting solid and hazardous waste, and from filling, grading, excavating, or burning wastes.
 
The site was originally proposed for the NPL in December 1982. In September 1983, it was dropped
from consideration because, on the basis of the data then available, its score on the Hazard Ranking
System, which EPA uses to assess sites for the NPL, was below the 28.50 cutoff. On the basis of new data
gathered by the State since September 1983, the site's score is high enough to warrant proposing it again
for the NPL.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
