NPL Site Narrative for Vancouver Water
Station #1 Contamination
 
VANCOUVER WATER STATION #1 CONTAMINATION
Vancouver, Washington
 
 
Vancouver Water Station #1 is located at East Reserve and Northeast Fourth Plain Boulevard in
Vancouver, Clark County, Washington. Vancouver Water Station #1 is one of several stations that consists
of ground water wells that supply drinking water through a blended system to approximately 134,000
people. In October 1992, EPA listed a nearby water station, Vancouver Water Station #4, on the National
Priorities List.
 
In response to the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), ground water from the wells at Vancouver Water
Station #1 was sampled in 1988. Since 1988, increasing levels of tetrachloroethene (PCE) have been
detected in each of the wells comprising Vancouver Water Station #1. While levels of PCE have exceeded
the EPA maximum contaminant level established under SDWA, the City of Vancouver has used blended
water from the Vancouver Water Station #1 wells by selectively pumping lower concentration wells.
 
An extensive soil gas and ground water study conducted by the City of Vancouver was unsuccessful in
identifying the source of contamination in Vancouver Water Station #1 wells. In addition, a subsequent soil
gas and ground water study conducted by EPA was also unsuccessful in identifying the source of ground
water contamination. Although a definitive source has not been identified, several drycleaning facilities, gas
stations, and other facilities in the area are suspected contributors of ground water contamination.
 
EPA is currently considering various alternatives for further evaluation of potential sources and performing
remediation of the existing ground water contamination.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
