NPL Site Narrative for Vancouver Water
Station #4 Contamination
 
VANCOUVER WATER STATION #4 CONTAMINATION
Vancouver, Washington
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (July 29, 1991) : Vancouver Water Station #4 is located at 5th and Blandford
Streets in Vancouver, Clark County, in the southwest portion of Washington. Water Station #4 is one of
several stations that blend their output to supply drinking water to approximately 108,000 people. The State
Department of Health sampled Water Station #4 under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) in 1988. The
blended water samples, which represented water delivered to customers, contained tetrachloroethene
(PCE) in excess of EPA's Maximum Contaminant Level established under SDWA. The station was taken
out of service in October 1988. Subsequent sampling confirmed PCE contamination in the well field as well
as nearby private wells, some supplying domestic water.
 
The city hired a consultant to investigate the nature, extent, and source of the contamination. The
consultant conducted an extensive soil gas and ground water study in the area, including installing
and sampling numerous monitoring wells. Although high levels of PCE were detected in some ground
water samples from the monitoring wells, PCE was not detected in any soil samples collected from the
monitoring well borings.
 
In addition to sampling, the consultant inventoried land use in the area, identified historical potential
users of PCE, and identified many potential sources of the PCE in Water Station #4. While the sampling
indicated that the source(s) could be dry cleaners in the area, they have not yet been confirmed as sources
of the contamination.
 
Status (October 1992) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
