NPL Site Narrative for Vertac, Inc.
 
VERTAC, INC.
Jacksonville, Arkansas
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Vertac, Inc., Site covers 92 acres in Jacksonville, Arkansas.
Since the late 1940s, insecticides and herbicides have been manufactured at the site. As a result of
inadequate waste disposal methods and production controls, soil, surface water, and ground water have
been contaminated by insecticides, herbicides, chlorinated phenols, and dioxin.
 
In 1980, the Department of Justice (DOJ) brought, on behalf of EPA, a Federal civil action seeking
injunctive relief against Vertac, which now owns and operates the site, and Hercules, Inc., the former
owner. The State also filed against the two companies, and the cases were consolidated. In April 1980, a
hearing on a preliminary injunction resulted in Vertac being required to (1) drain and cover a contaminated
basin, (2) treat the drained liquids, (3) install a cut-off wall and drain around the basin, and (4) complete the
capping of all disposal areas. This work was completed in the summer of 1981.
 
Status (July 1983) : To address remaining contamination problems that could not be addressed in the
preliminary injunction or that required further study, EPA, the State, and DOJ negotiated a Consent Decree
with Vertac which became effective in early 1982. It required Vertac to provide a consultant's study of on-
site conditions, a proposal for on-site remedial work, a study of off-site conditions, a study of Lake Dupree
(a nearby lake contaminated with dioxin), and a plan for on-site waste management.
 
Work required by the Consent Decree is proceeding. Vertac has submitted several of the studies and
proposals required by the Consent Decree, and EPA has submitted responses to the reports received to
date.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
