 OSWER/OSRTI   Washington, DC 20460  
 
 NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
***Final Site*** September 2010 
VIENNA WELLS  Vienna , Missouri  
 Maries County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Vienna Wells site is located in Maries County, Vienna, Missouri.  The site is located on a low ridge that lies between the Gasconade and Maries River Valley.   
 Site History: 
The Vienna Wells site includes three contaminated public drinking water wells and the suspected source area, the former Langenberg Hat Factory facility.  The Langenberg Hat Factory facility operated from 1952 unti l 1996.  In 2007, the Missouri Department of Natural Resources ( MDNR) Public Drinking Water Branch ( PDWB) requested an investigation  to determine the source of tetrachloroethylene (PCE) in the Vienna Wells public drinking water supply.  Based on the investigation, MDNR determined the Langenberg Hat Factory facility was a suspected source of the PCE contamination.    
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 PCE has been detected in Well #1 and Well #3 over a 10- year period.  Site Inspection sampling in 2007 and 2008 confirmed the presence of PCE in the public drinking water wells and in the distribution system, indicating there is actual exposure to PCE.  The most recent sampling results for Well #3 indicate concentrations exceeding the Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) for PCE in November 2008, February 2009, May 2009, and August 2009.  
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The City of Vienna public drinking water Well #3 is the primary water source for approximately 628 residents, Well #1 is currently operating as an emergency standby and supplemental water supply well.  The PDWB monitoring documents that levels of PCE have been increasing in Vienna Well #3 since 1997 and now exceed the MCL.    
 Response Activities (to date): 
The City of Vienna has secured funding for an air stripper project  to remove contamination from the water supply.    
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The State of Missouri referred the site to EPA.  Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated , but were not viable at this time.  EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the S tate.     
[The description of the site (release) is based on infor mation available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS.  The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrativ e summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs ca n be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html  or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1 -888-422-8737.
 
