NPL Site Narrative for Vienna
Tetrachloroethene
 
VIENNA TETRACHLOROETHENE
Vienna, West Virginia
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 1999) : The Vienna Tetrachloroethene site (also known as the Vienna
Cleaners site) is located in a light commercial and residential area of downtown Vienna, Wood County,
West Virginia. The city of Vienna lies in a valley along the eastern bank of the Ohio River, and the
downtown area is located about 2 miles north of the city limits of Parkersburg, West Virginia. The Vienna
Cleaners facility is situated about one block northwest of the Vienna City Hall and is surrounded by private
businesses and single family dwellings.
 
Dry cleaning operations have been ongoing at the Vienna Cleaners facility since the late 1940s. Past
practices at the cleaners included pouring waste tetrachloroethene (PCE), a dry cleaning solvent, on the
ground behind the facility. Spills of PCE from outdoor, above-ground solvent storage tanks have also been
reported. Although the quantity of waste PCE disposed at the Vienna Cleaners facility is not known, in
1992, the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection classified the Vienna Cleaners facility as
a small quantity generator under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), producing 121
kilograms of PCE waste each month.
 
The dry cleaning solvent, PCE, is the principal contaminant of concern at this site. Based on city, state,
EPA, and potentially responsible party sampling data, PCE has been detected at elevated concentrations
in surface and subsurface soils at the Vienna Cleaners facility, in ground water beneath the facility, and in
the city sewers in the immediate vicinity of the facility.
 
In 1992, six of Vienna's 12 municipal wells, all located in the immediate vicinity of the Vienna Cleaners
facility, were removed from service because of PCE contamination. In 1995, EPA used emergency funds to
build two new municipal wells, which were brought on-line in March 1997. All of the nearly 11,000 residents
of the city of Vienna, and 14,500 people overall, rely on the city's eight active municipal wells for their water
supply. Another 40,500 people are served by the five wells making up the Parkersburg, West Virginia,
municipal water supply system. All 13 of these public wells are located within three miles of the Vienna
Cleaners facility; two of them are located less than one-half mile away.
 
A second source of PCE ground water contamination in the immediate area appears to be the Busy Bee
Cleaners facility, located about three blocks southwest of the Vienna Cleaners facility. The Busy Bee
Cleaners was once operated by the same parties that now own Vienna Cleaners.
 
Status (October 1999) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
