NPL Site Narrative for W.R. Grace & Co.,
Inc./Wayne Interim Storage Site (USDOE)
 
W.R. GRACE & CO., INC./WAYNE INTERIM STORAGE SITE
(USDOE)
Wayne Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 8, 1983) : Rare Earths, Inc., extracted thorium and rare earths
from monazite ore on a 6.5-acre site in Wayne Township, Passaic County, New Jersey, from 1948 to
1957, when Davison Chemical, a division of W.R. Grace & Co. Inc., acquired the facility. Grace ceased
processing monazite ore in 1971 and amended its license to cover only storage of radioactive materials.
 
Grace and its consultant decontaminated the site in 1974, and in 1975 the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission released the site for unrestricted use provided the land deed indicated that radioactive
material was buried on the property. The wastes on-site consist of residues from processing monazite ore
and from the decontamination.
 
An EPA aerial survey in May 1981 indicated elevated radiation levels at the plant site and an area to the
west. As a result of extensive soil contamination, the overburden covering the waste disposal area on the
site may be insufficient to prevent further movement of the contaminated soil by run-off.
 
Status (September 21, 1984) : The U.S. Department of Energy (USDOE) is addressing the site under a $2
million appropriation as part of its Formerly Utilized Sites Remedial Action Program (FUSRAP).
 
Status (March 13, 1989) : USDOE acquired the site on September 18, 1984 and renamed it "Wayne
Interim Storage Site." On September 21, 1984, the site was placed on the final NPL under the name "W.R.
Grace & Co., Inc. (Wayne Plant)."
 
The site is being re-classified as a Federal facility site and being renamed "W.R. Grace & Co., Inc./Wayne
Interim Storage Site (USDOE)."
 
Under FUSRAP, USDOE has removed radioactively contaminated soil from a number of properties in the
vicinity and contained it on-site in an interim storage facility awaiting a permanent disposal site. USDOE is
conducting a monitoring program at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
