NPL Site Narrative for Wade (ABM)
 
WADE (ABM)
Chester, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 23, 1981) : The Wade (ABM) Site covers 3 acres on the bank of the
Delaware River in Chester, Pennsylvania. The site was originally a rubber reclamation facility but has been
used as an industrial waste storage and disposal facility since the early 1970s. Several thousand drums of
toxic industrial waste were stored on the property, or the contents were poured directly onto the ground.
In addition, thousands of gallons of waste were discharged directly from tank trailers onto the ground. The
site is contaminated with toxic and carcinogenic compounds.
 
This site was once listed under the name "ABM-Wade."
 
Status (September 8, 1983) : EPA and the State have conducted a partial cleanup of this site. The
State will be the lead agency for the remainder of the cleanup. The next phase will include inventorying,
categorizing, and staging of waste currently on-site. This work began in the summer of 1983 and may take
several months to complete.
 
EPA has reached a settlement with 34 waste generators who have agreed to contribute $1.9 million to the
site cleanup. A current civil action against nine other responsible parties (other generators, transporters,
and the owner) seeks court-ordered cleanup and recovery of costs incurred.
 
Status (March 23, 1989) : This site is being deleted from the NPL because EPA, in consultation with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, has determined that all appropriate Superfund-financed response under
CERCLA has been implemented, and that no further response by responsible parties is appropriate.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
