NPL Site Narrative for Walcotte Chemical
Co. Warehouses
 
WALCOTTE CHEMICAL CO. WAREHOUSES
Greenville, Mississippi
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 23, 1981) : The Walcotte Chemical Co. Warehouses Nos. 1 and 2 are
located in Greenville, Mississippi. The facility has been inactive since the early 1960s when Walcotte's
fertilizer/mixing plant closed. Subsequent to closure of the plant, the owner abandoned the property
because of nonpayment of taxes.
 
Remaining in Warehouse No. 1 are an estimated 225 drums in various stages of deterioration. They
contain mineral spirits, formic acid, and unidentified substances. Other chemicals, including nitrates and
caustics, are stored in disintegrating bags and bulk bins. Some evidence exists of spillage on the concrete
floor of the warehouse, but there is no evidence that contaminants have entered surface water or ground
water. This warehouse is close to residential areas and businesses, however.
 
Warehouse No. 2 contains a significant volume of a white granular substance, as well as several drums of
unknown materials. Immediately outside the warehouse are several large tanks with unknown contents and
in various stages of deterioration.
 
In July 1981, EPA assisted the Mississippi Department of Natural Resources in sampling the site.
 
Status (December 30, 1982) : This site was on the Interim Priorities List, announced October 23, 1981
before formal rulemaking began in the Federal Register. It is being deleted from the NPL because EPA,
in consultation with the State of Mississippi, has determined that responsible or other parties have
implemented all appropriate response action required.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
