NPL Site Narrative for Waldick Aerospace
Devices, Inc.
 
WALDICK AEROSPACE DEVICES, INC.
Wall Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Waldick Aerospace Devices, Inc., has operated a metal-
electroplating business on a 2-acre site in Wall Township in Monmouth County, New Jersey, since 1979.
 
Waste waters containing heavy metals, acids, and volatile organic chemicals were discharged into the
ground on a daily basis prior to 1982, according to a former employee. In 1982, Monmouth County and the
State inspected the site. The inspections and subsequent sampling revealed significant levels of cadmium,
chromium, and tetrachloroethylene in the soil. Monitoring wells on the site are contaminated with the same
compounds. Nearby public and private wells serving about 28,000 people are threatened.
 
In March 1984, Waldick Aerospace Devices, Inc., was tried in Superior Court for criminal violation of
Federal and State environmental laws. KLS Industries, one of the parties potentially responsible for wastes
at this facility, agreed to take remedial action at the site under the supervision of the Monmouth County
Board of Health. Highly contaminated soil was excavated to depths of 1 to 2 feet on three sides of the main
building and was removed from the site.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : Despite continued legal action, no further corrective measures have been taken
by the officers of the two companies. By January 1985, Waldick Aerospace Devices, Inc., KLS Industries,
and the company officers had all filed for bankruptcy.
 
In May and June of 1985, EPA conducted limited sampling of soils, ground water, surface water, and air.
These samples documented the contamination of soils and ground water. Surface water and private wells
in the area are all upgradient from the site.
 
EPA has started a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination
at the site and to identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
