 
  
OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***NPL Site*** September 2016 
WAPPINGER CREEK  Dutchess County , New York  
 Dutchess County  
 
 Site Location: 
The Wappinger Creek site is located in a mixed residential and commercial/industrial area of the village of Wappingers Falls, town of Poughkeepsie, and town of Wappinger, New York. The Wappinger Creek site is comprised of contaminated sediments from multiple sources. The tidal portion of Wappinger Creek begins downstream of Wappingers Falls and extends for approximately two miles downstream to the confluence with the Hudson River.  
 
 Site History: 
Sediment contamination within the tidal portion of Wappinger Creek was identified by the s tate of New York in 2001, adjacent to and downstream of an industrial park located at the base of Wappinger Falls. A wide variety of i ndustrial activities have been conducted at the industrial park location for more than 180 years includ ing textile dyeing, manufactured gas plant (MGP) operations, metal plating, plastic mold injection, felt hat manufacturing, ammunition production, chemical manufacturing and distribution, and several other industrial and commercial acti vities. Buildings within the industrial park associated with a metal plating facility had floor drains that discharged to Wappinger Creek. A former spillway and lagoon, which discharged to Wappinger Creek,  received industrial wastes from the southern portion of the industrial park.  
 
 Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
The primary contaminants of concern are mercury and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH s), both of which are attributable to historical operations within the industrial park . Other contaminants detected at elevated concentrations in the industrial park and in creek sediments include chromium , mercury and lead. 
 
 Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment : 
The tidal creek is used for recreational boating and fishing  for human consumption. The Wappinger Greenway, which includes the Wappinger Greenway Trail, runs along the bank of Wappinger Creek downstream from  the industrial park to near the tidal creek’s confluence with the Hudson River. The Wappinger Greenway Trail  links historical, cultural, natural, and economic resources of local and regional significance  and provides access to portions of the creek contaminated with mercury. A narrow wetland area is located along the contaminated portion of Wappinger Creek . 
 
 Response Activities (to date): 
There have been several investigations and cleanups within the industrial park. However, mercury and PAH contamination remains adjacent to and downstream of the industrial park. 
 
 Need for NPL Listing: 
The state of New York referred this site to the EPA. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of New York. 
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
   
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636.
 
