NPL Site Narrative for Ward Transformer
 
WARD TRANSFORMER
Raleigh, North Carolina
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 5, 2002) : The Ward Transformer site is located near the Raleigh
Durham International Airport in a predominantly industrial area of Raleigh, Wake County, North Carolina.
The site encompasses an active electrical transformer building/reconditioning facility constructed in 1964
on 11 acres of previously undeveloped land. A perennial stream bordered by wetlands leads from the
property to a recreational lake and fishery. The closest residence, the only one within 1/4 mile of the site, is
approximately 300 feet northeast of the Ward Transformer property. The site is being proposed to the NPL
because elevated levels of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), dioxins, furans, arsenic, chromium, copper,
lead, manganese, and zinc, all attributable to facility operations, have been found throughout the site, and
elevated concentrations of PCBs have been detected in surface water downstream of the site, posing a
threat to recreational fisheries and wetlands.
 
Prior to 1972, storm water runoff flow from the facility was uncontrolled. Two impoundments were
constructed around 1972 to collect runoff, and in 1979, a retaining wall (curb height) was constructed
around the facility to direct runoff into the impoundment. An onsite treatment plant, installed in 1979,
removes PCBs from the impoundment water prior to its discharge. Recent inspections by the North
Carolina Division of Water Quality show that the treatment facility is in compliance.
 
The facility currently incinerates used transformer parts in a permitted onsite burnoff oven/incinerator and
reclaims copper from the resulting ash. Recent inspections by the North Carolina Division of Air Quality
indicate that the incinerator is in compliance with its permit. Prior to the installation of the incinerator,
transformer parts were burned in the open air to reclaim copper. A concrete area near the incinerator is
covered with dark, oily soil. In 1978 and 1979, EPA collected samples on the facility property and from an
unnamed tributary and Little Brier Creek downstream from the facility. PCB contamination was found in
soil, in the storm water impoundment, and water and sediment collected from the unnamed tributary and
Little Brier Creek. No additional action was taken by the EPA on the site until 1993. Prompted by reports
of bankruptcy, EPA conducted a removal investigation and no contaminants were detected above removal
action levels.
 
The North Carolina Superfund Section's Preliminary Assessment (PA) conducted in 1994, and subsequent
Site Inspection (SI) performed in 1995, recommended further action under CERCLA as part of an
Expanded Site Inspection. In 1997, samples were collected for the Expanded Site Inspection by the North
Carolina Superfund Section. Soil at the wooded rear of the Ward property, outside fencing or curbing,
contained PCB 1260, manganese, zinc, 1,2,3,7,8 pentachlorodibenzofuran, and octachlorodibenzofuran.
Sediment collected along the shoreline of the impoundment showed PCB 1260. Soil near the incinerator
contained Aroclor 1260, dioxins, arsenic, chromium, copper, lead, manganese, and zinc. Aroclor 1260 was
also found in sediment samples collected from the unnamed tributary and Little Brier Creek less than a
mile downstream of the site.
 
Status (April 2003) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
