NPL Site Narrative for Warwick Landfill
 
WARWICK LANDFILL
Warwick, New York
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : Warwick Landfill is located in the Town of Warwick,
Orange County, New York. It is approximately 1 mile northeast of the Village of Greenwood Lake and
approximately 7.5 miles south of the Village of Monroe.
 
The landfill is roughly L-shaped and occupies approximately 13 acres on a 25-acre privately owned
property fronting on Penaluna Road. The surrounding area is generally hilly, with residential clusters and
wooded areas. Both wetlands and rock outcrops exist adjacent to landfilled areas.
 
In about 1957, the town started to accept municipal wastes at the site under a permit from the Orange
County Department of Health. Industrial chemical wastes also may have been disposed of at the site over
an undetermined period of time. In 1977, the owner leased the site to Grace Disposal and Leasing, Ltd., of
Harriman, New York. In 1979, the State identified volatile organic compounds in leachate at the site. The
State subsequently issued a restraining order and closed the landfill.
 
Later, the State found relatively low levels of organic and metal compounds in soil, ground water, surface
water, and sediment on the site. Drainage from the landfill enters a stream south of the site which flows
into Greenwood Lake, a major recreational resource approximately 0.5 mile from the site.
 
The landfill is unlined and overlies moderately permeable soil and rock, and ground water is shallow (1-2
feet). These conditions facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water. A private well is within 0.15
mile of the site. Approximately 2,100 residents depend on wells within 3 miles of the site for drinking water.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : On December 28, 1988, EPA sent special notice letters to parties potentially
responsible for wastes associated with the site. The letters request that the parties conduct a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify
alternatives for remedial action. If they decline, EPA plans to start the work in March 1989.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
