NPL Site Narrative for Watkins-Johnson
Co. (Stewart Division Plant)
 
WATKINS-JOHNSON CO. (STEWART DIVISION PLANT)
Scotts Valley, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (January 22, 1987) : The Watkins-Johnson Co. (Stewart Division Plant) has
manufactured industrial furnaces and electrical parts since 1965 on a 3-acre site in Scotts Valley, Santa
Cruz County, California. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board (CRWQCB) and Watkins-
Johnson's consultant have detected organic chemicals, including trichloroethylene, trichloroethane,
tetrachloroethylene, dichloroethylene, and Freon in soil and ground water on the site. The contamination is
apparently the result of improper handling of hazardous waste.
 
Early in July 1986, CRWQCB issued Waste Discharge Requirements to the company. The requirements
are the CRWQCB's legal mechanism for regulating activities at facilities under its jurisdiction. Later in July,
CRWQCB issued a Cleanup and Abatement Order to the company. In response, Watkins-Johnson has
begun an interim program to pump and treat contaminated ground water.
 
Wells within 3 miles of the site draw on the Santa Margarita Aquifer, designated by EPA as a sole source
of drinking water in the area. An estimated 12,000 people use the wells.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : On September 21, 1987, Watkins-Johnson and EPA signed an Administrative
Order on Consent under which the company has conducted a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/
FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action. Watkins-Johnson submitted the final RI report in April 1989 and the final FS report in November
1989. The remedy is scheduled to be completed in the summer of 1990.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
