NPL Site Narrative for Watson Johnson
Landfill
 
WATSON JOHNSON LANDFILL
Richland Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (June 14, 2001) : The Watson Johnson Landfill site consists of a 32-acre inactive
landfill located approximately 0.75 mile north of Quakertown in Richland Township, Bucks County,
Pennsylvania. The landfill accepted waste from approximately 1936 until 1973 from all of Quakertown
Borough, portions of Perkasie and Sellersville Boroughs and other Upper Bucks County areas. The exact
types and quantities of wastes accepted at the landfill are not known. The landfill was never permitted to
accept hazardous waste. The Waste Disposal Site Survey (Eckhardt Survey) that was completed by the
U.S. Congress in 1979, however, indicated that W.R. Grace & Company disposed of a total of 3,200 tons
of waste at the Watson Johnson Landfill from their Quakertown chemical facility from 1965 through 1968.
According to this report, this waste was composed of various organic and inorganic compounds, resins,
and elastomers. Further evidence of hazardous substances deposited at the site was provided during the
drilling of monitoring wells at the landfill, when a drum containing low levels of tetrachloroethene (PCE) was
discovered in the landfill 6 to 12 inches below the surface.
 
During the time the landfill was active, several ponds of leachate were located along its southern and
western edges. In 1972 the owner of the landfill, Watson Johnson, pumped the leachate from one of these
lagoons into a swamp adjacent to the landfill where it flowed into Tohickon Creek. This caused a significant
fish kill (several hundred fish or more) to occur in Tohickon Creek on July 2, 1972. Investigations by the
Bucks County Health Department and the Pennsylvania Fish Commission determined the pumping of
leachate from the Watson Johnson Landfill was the cause of the fish kill. The Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Resources (PADER) issued an order to the Watson Johnson Landfill in 1973. This order
determined that the site was an illegal solid waste disposal site that allowed leachate to discharge into
surface waters of the Commonwealth; therefore, the site was ordered to immediately cease all operation.
 
EPA conducted field investigations at the site from 1998 through 1999. Samples were collected from on-
site soils, adjacent wetlands, Tohickon Creek, and on-site ground water monitoring wells and nearby
residential and municipal wells. Hazardous substances detected in the soils of the landfill include
volatile organic compounds, semi-volatile organic compounds, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and
metals. PCE and trichloroethene (TCE) were detected in an on-site monitoring well and a Quakertown
Borough Municipal Well (the water from this municipal well is treated to remove the contamination prior to
distribution). Elevated concentrations of metals and PCBs were detected in sediment samples collected
from an adjacent wetland and an elevated level of mercury was detected downstream of the site in
Tohickon Creek.
 
Immediately to the west of the Watson Johnson Landfill is a property which was formerly mined and
then later used for waste tile disposal by the American Olean Tile company. This adjacent property may
therefore be contaminated with metals and/or other hazardous substances. In the Hazard Ranking System
(HRS) scoring for the Watson Johnson Landfill site, however, all of the hazardous substances documented
to be in ground water and surface waters were detected in elevated levels in the soils of the Watson
Johnson Landfill. Therefore, the releases evaluated in the HRS scoring are at least partially attributable to
the Watson Johnson Landfill site.
 
In June 2001, EPA initiated an additional, more comprehensive residential well sampling event. EPA is
currently awaiting the results of this sampling.
 
Status (September 2001) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
