NPL Site Narrative for Wedzeb
Enterprises, Inc.
 
WEDZEB ENTERPRISES, INC.
Lebanon, Indiana
 
 
Conditions at listing (December 1982) : The Wedzeb Enterprises, Inc., site consists of two warehouses
in Lebanon, Indiana. They were used to store capacitors, many containing oils, for subsequent distribution
and resale. In May 1981, a fire destroyed one warehouse, which contained about 50,000 capacitors,
and caused the release of PCBs and low levels of dioxin and tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF) into
the immediate environment. The PCB-contaminated warehouse debris remains on the site, which
is neither secure nor posted. There is no protection from wind and precipitation. State and Federal
investigators sampled the site on several occasions, beginning in May 1981. Most samples obtained from
the warehouse rubble contained more than 500 parts per million (ppm) PCBs; one contained 24,500 ppm.
Dioxin and TCDF were in concentrations (30 to 500 parts per trillion) that could not adversely affect human
health. Low concentrations of PCBs were detected in Prairie Creek. PCBs may have contaminated sludge
from the Lebanon sewage treatment plant via a basement drain (later sealed) in the warehouse. Ground
water is threatened because on-site soil is permeable, as is the aquifer 100 feet below.
 
In June 1981, the State requested that the principal owner of Wedzeb submit a proposal for cleanup and
disposal. The situation was referred to the State Attorney General for action in October 1981.
 
Status (July 1983) : The Indiana State Board of Health is discussing cleanup requirements with the owner.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
