NPL Site Narrative for Weldon Spring
Quarry/Plant/Pits (USDOE/Army)
 
WELDON SPRING QUARRY/PLANT/PITS (USDOE/ARMY)
St. Charles County, Missouri
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : The Weldon Spring Quarry covers 9 acres in St. Charles
County, Missouri, about 30 miles west of St. Louis. During 1941-44, the Army operated an ordnance
works 3 miles to the northeast of the old limestone quarry. Due to frequent spills, waste water containing
sulfonate derivatives contaminated both surface water and ground water in the area, according to the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS).
 
In 1955, after the Army demolished and removed the works, the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC)
started construction of the Weldon Spring Feed Materials Plant on the land. The Army disposed of soil and
building rubble from the demolition, which were contaminated with trinitrotoluene (TNT) and dinitrotoluene
(DNT), in the deepest part of the quarry. The U.S. Department of Energy (USDOE), successor to AEC,
now owns the plant.
 
In 1957, the Weldon Spring Feed Materials Plant began converting uranium concentrates to pure uranium
salts and metal. The plant also processed some thorium ore concentrates. During operations, the
buildings, equipment, immediate terrain, process sewer system, and drainage easement to the Missouri
River became contaminated with uranium, thorium, and their decay products, according to USDOE.
During 1959-69, AEC used the quarry for disposal of drums, process equipment, building rubble, and soils
contaminated with thorium, uranium, and their decay products. Also, radioactive process wastes were
disposed of near the plant in four raffinate pits covering approximately 50 acres.
 
USDOE found elevated levels of uranium, radium, and nitroaromatics in monitoring wells adjacent to the
quarry. A well field in the Missouri River alluvial aquifer and 0.5 mile from the quarry serves 58,000 St.
Charles County residents.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Under an August 1986 agreement with EPA, USDOE will carry out remedial
actions at the quarry, as well as the plant area and nearby radioactively contaminated properties. USDOE
is sampling the quarry, plant, and pit areas as part of a comprehensive remedial investigation.
 
USDOE estimates that the quarry contains about 95,000 cubic yards of waste. In the plant area,
approximately 312,000 cubic yards of radioactively contaminated soil, equipment, and buildings would
have to be removed or cleaned up to meet current USDOE guidelines for unrestricted use of the land. The
disposal pits contain an estimated 220,000 cubic yards of uranium and thorium residues. USDOE surveys
show that other radioactively contaminated properties, near both the quarry and the plant, require removal
of about 27,200 cubic yards of soil to meet current USDOE guidelines for unrestricted use. In addition,
radioactive materials have been released to surface water, ground water, and air, according to USDOE
and USGS.
 
Status (March 13, 1989) : On June 24, 1988, EPA proposed to expand this Federal facility site, which was
placed on the final NPL in July 1987. EPA has determined that the Weldon Spring Feed Materials Plant
and Raffinate Pits, located less than 3 miles from the quarry, are linked to the contamination problems
at the original site. No comments were received on the proposal. Therefore, the site is expanded and
renamed "Weldon Spring Quarry/Plant/Pits (USDOE/Army)."
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
