NPL Site Narrative for Welsbach & General
Gas Mantle (Camden Radiation)
 
WELSBACH & GENERAL GAS MANTLE (CAMDEN RADIATION)
Camden and Gloucester Cities, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (October 1995) : The Welsbach & General Gas Mantle site is comprised of two
former incandescent gas mantle manufacturing facilities and numerous residential properties located in the
urban areas of Camden and Gloucester City, New Jersey. The site was initially identified in 1980 during an
archive search conducted as part of the investigation of a contaminated radiological site located in northern
New Jersey. As a result, an aerial radiological survey of Gloucester, New Jersey and surrounding areas
was conducted in May of 1981. The survey encompassed a 20-square-kilometer area surrounding the
former General Gas Mantle and Welsbach companies. The survey identified eight separate areas with
elevated radiation levels. These included locations of the former Welsbach plant and General Gas Mantle
Corporation and three residential areas. The remaining areas exhibiting elevated radiation levels were
attributed to sites permitted by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) to use and store radioactive
materials.
 
After several preliminary screening surveys, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP), conducted a comprehensive investigation in 1991 of five non-NRC permitted areas in the
Camden and Gloucester City vicinity to determine the extent of radiological contamination present.
Numerous residential properties were found to have gamma radiation levels exceeding twice the
background level for gamma radiation. Of the 93 properties investigated by NJDEP, 32 properties were
selected for evaluation because they were inhabited by individuals or workers. The 32 properties are
located throughout Camden and Gloucester City. The most probable route of radiation exposure is direct
contact with gamma-emitting materials. Although potential contamination of ground water, surface water,
and air is suspected, releases to these routes have not been documented. To date, certain contaminated
areas have been covered with asphalt or cement. One residence was acquired by NJDEP due to the
magnitude of the risk posed by the radioactive materials present at that property.
 
Status (June 1996) : NJDEP has completed most of its planned work, which included covering
contaminated areas and relocating residents or workers. NJDEP's activities have provided temporary
protection to residents and workers by minimizing the potential for gamma radiation exposure at certain
areas of known contamination.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
