NPL Site Narrative for Westinghouse
Electric Corp. (Sunnyvale Plant)
 
WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP. (SUNNYVALE PLANT)
Sunnyvale, California
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Westinghouse Electric Corp. formerly manufactured
electrical transformers at a plant covering 75 acres in Sunnyvale, Santa Clara County, California. The
facility is surrounded by residential, industrial, and business areas.
 
Monitoring wells on the site are contaminated with PCBs and dichloro-, trichloro-, and tetrachlorobenzene,
according to analyses conducted by a consultant to Westinghouse. Contamination is believed to have
resulted from a leaking PCB storage tank and from localized spills. About 300,000 people depend on
ground water within 3 miles of the site as a source of drinking water.
 
Westinghouse has removed the leaking tanks and is working with the California Regional Water Quality
Control Board (CRWQCB) to determine the extent of soil and ground water contamination.
 
This is one of 19 sites in the South Bay Area of San Francisco. Facilities at these sites have used a variety
of toxic chemicals, primarily chlorinated organic solvents, which contaminate a common ground water
basin. Although these sites are listed separately, EPA intends to apply an area-wide approach to the
problem as well as take specific action as necessary.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : In July 1985, CRWQCB issued Waste Discharge Requirements to the company
for interim measures and a remedial investigation. The requirements are the board's legal mechanism for
regulating activities at facilities under its jurisdiction. CRWQCB, in conjunction with EPA and the California
Department of Health Services, is considering various response actions at the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
