 OSWER/OSRTI State, Tribe, and Site Identification Branch   Washington, DC 20460 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) 
***Final Site*** April 2006 
WEST HIGHWAY 6 & HIGHWAY 281 Hastings, Nebraska 
                           Adams County 3rd Congressional District 
 
à Site Location/Size: 
 The West Highway 6 & Highway 281 site is located in Hastings, Nebraska, in Adams County. The area of soil and ground water contamination is approximately 1.75 miles long by 1/3 mile wide.  
 
´ Site History: 
 One known source of the ground water contamination appears to  be from the former Dana Corporation facility, which manufactured a variety of cast piston rings for internal com bustion engines at the Hastings facility. The former Dana facility housed four vapor degreasing units inside concrete pits that utilized tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and trichloroethene (TCE) as degreasers to clean the piston rings during wet mach ining operations. The vapor degreasing units were used from the 1970s through the 1990s. A release of solvents occurred approximately between 1984 and 1987, but the amount of PCE released is unknown. PCE contamination was first documente d at the facility in 1998 during a Phase 1 and Phase II Environment Site Assessment. As a follow-up, Dana hired a consultant to conduct a soil and ground water subsurface investigation at the facility in 1999.  Dana has since ceased ope rations at the facility, and the facility is currently owned by another company.  EPA is investigating other potential source areas in the surrounding area. 
  
r Site Contamination/Contaminants: 
 During sampling investigations, elevated levels of PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, carbon tetrachloride, and other volatile organic compounds were present in the primary drinking water aquifer within the study area. Two municipal wells and several private wells contained PCE at levels above the maximum contaminant level.  
 
v Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment:  
 The City of Hastings consists of approximately 24,064 people consuming drinking water fr om a municipal system. The ground water plume of contamination has impacted two muni cipal wells and several privately-owned domestic wells. 
 
3 Response Activities (to date): 
 Dana Corporation performed multiple response actions at  the source area under the State of Nebraska’s Voluntary Cleanup program. Dana Corporation conduc ted installation of soil vapor extraction and ground water extraction systems and permanganate injection in affected onsite portions of the aquifer. Ground water sampling conducted by Dana in January 2005 indicated very high levels of PCE remain in the aquifer beneath the site.  Three private wells have been impacted by the contamination and the users of these wells have recently been connected to the municipal water supply. 
   
[The description of the site (release) is based on information av ailable at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The d escription may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of  contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]
  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regardi ng the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaq.html
 or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.  
