OLEM/OSRTI Washington, DC 20460 
 
NATIONAL  PRIORITIES  LIST  (NPL)  
***NPL Site***    March 2022 
WESTSIDE LEAD Atlanta, Georgia Fulton County 
 
 Site Location: The Westside Lead site consists primarily of approximately 2,097 residential properties in or around the English Avenue and Vine City neighborhoods on the west side of the city of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, although commercial and  industrial properties may also be contaminated.   Site History: Historically, dozens of foundries operated in Atlanta with documentation going back to the late 1800s. As part of the  metal casting process, spent foundry and slag byproducts were generated. Slag is the waste product leftover when desired metals have been removed from ore at a smelter. Slag can be readily distinguished in the field from natural rock by its  notable characteristics and contains high concentrations of lead and arsenic. Historical information indicates low -lying areas in Atlanta’s hilly topography were filled to mak e way for development. Slag waste was commonly used as fill,  including in the Vine City and English Avenue neighborhoods. The site was discovered in 2018 when the Saikawa  Laboratory at Emory University collected soil samples from urban growing spaces and lawns on the west side of Atlanta.   Site Contamination/Contaminants:  Soil is contaminated with lead and arsenic at levels that exceed health-based benchmark levels.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Approximately 40% of the properties sampled in the current study area are above the site- specific cleanup level for lead and require cleanup. Approximately 90% of the residential properties sampled in the current study area have soil that is  contaminated above background levels for lead and/or arsenic.   Response Activities (to date): 
 
 
 
 
In March 2019, at the request of the state, the EPA conducted soil sampling activities to identify potential lead  contamination. As of January 10, 2022, 918 properties have been sampled, of which 358 require cleanup. The EPA initiated   cleanup and restoration activities in January 2020. 
 
 Need for NPL Listing: The state of Georgia referred the site to the EPA because of possible lead contamination that was discovered on the west side of Atlanta. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated but are not viable at this time because of the potential large number of properties that will require cleanup, as well as the need to continue to characterize the  contaminated areas. The EPA received a letter of support from the state for placing this site on the NPL. 
     
[The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The  description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.]  
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs  
can be found on 
the Internet at https:// www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp  or by telephone at 1-800-CDC-INFO or 1-800-232-4636. 
