NPL Site Narrative for Whittaker Corp.
 
WHITTAKER CORP.
Minneapolis, Minnesota
 
 
Conditions at listing (September 1983) : The Whittaker Corp. Site contains several contaminated areas
within a 10-acre Whittaker property, which is in an industrial area of northeast Minneapolis, Hennepin
County, Minnesota. The Mississippi River flows about 1,200 feet to the west. A residential area begins
several blocks to the south.
 
Industrial operations have been conducted at the site from the mid-1940s through 1981. Whittaker has
owned most of the site since 1957, when it acquired American Petrochemical Co., the site's previous
owner. Tool Tech, a manufacturer of rotary drill pipe, purchased a portion of the site in 1977. Materials
manufactured and/or packaged at the site included paints, industrial coatings, and antifreezes. Paints,
paint sludges, paint pigments, solvents, and still bottoms are among the wastes that may have been buried
or spilled in several areas of the site. Suspicious materials were unearthed during a 1978 excavation for
installation of a parking lot on Tool Tech property. The State learned of the materials in 1981.
 
At the request of the State, Whittaker and Tool Tech have compiled records and interviewed former
employees to gather information on previous activities at the site. They have compiled some corporate
records regarding past ownership and disposal practices on their properties. Whittaker has commissioned
a study to determine what, if any, impacts the site has on area ground water.
 
Status (June 1984) : The State has requested that Whittaker (1) undertake additional investigations of
ground water contamination at or near the site, including resampling of existing monitoring wells and
installation of three additional monitoring wells and (2) establish more clearly the types and amounts
of materials buried on-site. The State is contacting other parties in the vicinity of the site for additional
information.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
