NPL Site Narrative for White Swan
Cleaners/Sun Cleaners Area Ground
Water Contamination
 
WHITE SWAN CLEANERS/SUN CLEANERS AREA GROUND
WATER CONTAMINATION
Wall Township, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (April 30, 2003) : The White Swan Cleaners/Sun Cleaners Area Ground Water
Contamination site consists of overlapping contaminated ground water plumes from sources located on
two properties in a commercial/residential area of Wall Township, Monmouth County, New Jersey. The
sources are located at the former White Swan Laundry and Cleaners (a.k.a., Summit Bank, Fleet Bank),
1322 Sea Girt Avenue; and the former Sun Cleaners, 2213 Route 35 (a.k.a., 201 Manasquan Circle).
The former Sun Cleaners property is located approximately 0.3 mile southwest of the former White Swan
property.
 
In August 1997, a resident of Magnolia Avenue in Wall Township informed the Monmouth County Health
Department (MCHD) that ground water samples collected in 1990 from three private irrigation wells had
exhibited concentrations of tetrachloroethylene (PCE) up to 1,546 parts per billion (ppb). MCHD resampled
the three irrigation wells, and sampled four additional irrigation wells. The analytical results indicated the
presence of PCE in ground water at levels up to 595 ppb. The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) determined that three Sea Girt Municipal wells were at risk of contamination and
sampled them for volatile organic compounds (VOC) on a monthly basis beginning in April 1999. No
contamination was detected until September 1999, when PCE was detected in one of the wells at a
concentration of 0.54 micrograms per liter (µg/L).
 
In 1995-1996, Phase I and Phase II Assessments were conducted at Sun Cleaners. Areas of concern
identified at the facility during these assessments included a steel 30-gallon drum and a steel 55-gallon
drum, both located north of the Sun Cleaners building, and a discharge pipe that was connected to a
PCE separator. Analytical results of soil samples collected during the Phase II Assessment indicated the
presence of PCE at a concentration of 51 parts per million (ppm) in the vicinity of the 30-gallon drum and
8.2 ppm in the vicinity of the discharge pipe. A subsequent Environmental Site Investigation included
the collection of subsurface soil and ground water samples from borings advanced in the vicinity of
the Sun Cleaners building. Analytical results from this investigation indicated the presence of PCE at
concentrations up to 7,400 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) in subsurface soil and up to 200,000 µg/L in
ground water. The highest PCE concentrations (in both soil and ground water) were detected near the 55-
gallon drum.
 
In 1999, NJDEP initiated a ground water investigation in the area in an effort to identify responsible
parties for the PCE ground water contamination. During this investigation, ground water samples were
collected throughout the area. As a result of this investigation, White Swan Laundry and Cleaners and
Sun Cleaners were identified as possible sources of the ground water contamination. Site Inspections (SI)
were conducted by NJDEP at each of these operations. Soil and ground water samples confirmed that a
release of PCE had occurred at each of the operations. Based on the SI findings, White Swan Laundry
and Cleaners and Sun Cleaners were identified as contributing sources of the area-wide ground water
contamination.
 
An observed release of PCE to ground water is documented by the chemical analyses of ground water
samples collected from direct-push method borings during the NJDEP SIs conducted at the White Swan
Cleaners and Sun Cleaners properties. An observed release of PCE to ground water is also documented
by the chemical analyses of ground water samples collected from monitoring wells located on the White
Swan Laundry and Cleaners property. In addition, an observed release of PCE to ground water is
documented by the chemical analyses of aqueous samples collected in 1999 and 2000 from a municipal
well (i.e., Well #6) operated by the Borough of Sea Girt. On each occasion, Level II contamination was
documented for this well, which served an approximate population of 1,170 people at the time of the
initial release. Drinking water within the site's four-mile radius is obtained from public supply wells and
private wells screened in the Kirkwood-Cohansey Aquifer System, which is the aquifer of concern. In
addition, several wellhead protection areas exist within the four-mile target distance limit. Other areas
of environmental concern include indoor air quality of nearby homes and commercial facilities, and
contaminated ground water discharges to nearby surface water bodies.
 
Status (September 2004) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
