NPL Site Narrative for Whiting Field Naval
Air Station
 
WHITING FIELD NAVAL AIR STATION
Milton, Florida
 
 
Whiting Field Naval Air Station is a naval aviation training facility approximately 7 miles north of Milton,
Santa Rosa County, Florida. The facility is located in the northwest Florida panhandle, 20 miles northeast
of Pensacola on State Route 87A.
 
In July 1943, the 2,560-acre facility was commissioned to instruct student naval aviators. Various types
of wastes have been generated at the base throughout its history. Through the early 1980s, construction
and demolition debris, garbage, waste solvents and oils, tank bottom sludges, fuels and machine fluids
were disposed in different locations at the facility. Solvents have been used for cleaning structural metal
components prior to repair or fabrication, and for stripping paint from aluminum, steel, and alloys. The
facility does not have a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act treatment, storage, and disposal permit,
but it is listed as a generator of hazardous wastes.
 
Three onsite wells currently supply Whiting Field. On August 28, 1986, the Florida Department of
Environmental Regulation requested that one drinking water supply well (W-S2) be shut down due
to concentrations of benzene exceeding the State drinking water standard. Within one month, the
State similarly requested that an additional drinking water supply well (W-W3) be shut down due to
concentrations of trichloroethylene exceeding State drinking water standards. These wells were retrofitted
with a charcoal filter system and subsequently returned to service. Approximately 6,500 people located
within 4 miles of the facility obtain their drinking water from ground water.
 
The U.S. Navy has developed a program to monitor and control the environmental effects of activities
involving hazardous substances at naval installations. In accordance with this program, Whiting Field is
proceeding with its investigations and cleanup efforts.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
