NPL Site Narrative for Whitehouse Oil Pits
 
WHITEHOUSE OIL PITS
Whitehouse, Florida
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Whitehouse Oil Pits Site is in the suburban community of
Whitehouse, Duval County, Florida, about 10 miles west of downtown Jacksonville. The 5-acre site,
established in 1958, provided seven pits for waste oil and acid sludges generated by the Allied Petroleum
Co., a waste oil recycler. The pits were abandoned in 1968, when Allied declared bankruptcy. After
assuming ownership of the property by tax default, the City of Jacksonville installed and operated a
treatment and dewatering system at the oil pits. In 1976, the dike around one of the pits ruptured, spilling
200,000 gallons of wastes into wetlands along McGirts Creek. Using $315,000 made available under
Section 311 of the Clean Water Act, EPA cleaned up the site. During the cleanup, EPA determined that
the highly acidic water, sludges, and waste oil in the pits contained PCBs and heavy metals. EPA also
upgraded the treatment system, which the city then used to reduce the effluent PCBs to an acceptable
level. The pits were dewatered, packed with various drying materials, and capped. The treatment system
was dismantled, and drainage ditches were dug to control ground water in the area. Final monitoring of the
test wells and drainage effluents showed low levels of chlorinated organics, heavy metals, and acids.
 
Status (July 1983) : In June 1982, EPA awarded a $306,400 Cooperative Agreement to Florida for: (1)
work on the site ditches and dikes to control leachate, (2) a remedial investigation, and (3) a feasibility
study to identify alternatives for remedial action at the site. The work is scheduled to be completed in the
fourth quarter of 1983.
 
EPA identified parties potentially responsible for wastes at the site and is seeking their cooperation in the
cleanup.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
