NPL Site Narrative for Whitmoyer
Laboratories
 
WHITMOYER LABORATORIES
Jackson Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (October 15, 1984) : Whitmoyer Laboratories formerly manufactured animal
pharmaceuticals on a 17.5-acre site in Jackson Township, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania. The facility
produced and stored aniline and soluble arsenic compounds. Arsenical wastes were disposed of in
concrete vaults, holding tanks, and unlined lagoons.
 
Whitmoyer Laboratories operated from 1934 to July 1984, when it became a subsidiary of Rohm & Haas.
Rohm & Haas sold the facility in early 1978 to Beecham, Inc., which subsequently sold it to Stafford
Laboratories of Phoenix, Arizona.
 
After EPA and the State detected arsenic and various organic chemicals in ground water and surface water
on and off the site, Whitmoyer Labs supplied bottled water to nearby residents from the mid-1960s until
March 1982. At that time, some residents received a cash settlement. Then, in June 1984, the company
filed for bankruptcy and stopped supplying bottled water. About 4,700 people use wells within 3 miles of
the site as a source of drinking water.
 
Whitmoyer received Interim Status under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA) when it filed Part A of a permit application.
 
Status (January 1986) : In January 1985, EPA and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources signed a multisite cooperative agreement which provides CERCLA funds for various sites,
including Whitmoyer Labs. The funds are to start work preparatory to a remedial investigation/feasibility
study to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial
action.
 
Status (June 10, 1986) : This site is being placed on the NPL because it satisfies a component of EPA's
NPL/RCRA policy: the owner has demonstrated inability to finance appropriate remedial action by invoking
bankruptcy laws.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
