 
 OSWER/OSRTI 
Washington, DC 20460  
 
  N ATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)   
***Final Site***    December 2013 
WILCOX OIL COMPANY Creek County, Oklahoma Creek County 
  Site Location: Wilcox Oil Company (Wilcox) includes the inactive and abandoned Lorraine and Wilcox oil refineries located in Creek County, Oklahoma. The site is located within commuting distance to Tulsa.   Site History: The site consists of the former Lorraine/
Wilcox Refinery located in Creek County, Oklahoma. The property was utilized by two different refineries with overlapping boundaries from 1915 to 1965. Wilcox operated as a crude oil refinery from the 1920s until 1963. A skimming and cracking plant was constructed in 1929. The main components of the plant consisted of a skimming plant, cracking unit and re-distillation battery with vapor recovery system and treatment equipment. Wilcox expanded when it acquired the Lorraine Refinery in 1937, which was located adjacent to Wilcox. The two refineries comprise 125 acres. The site includes remnants of former oil refini
ng operations and tank farms. Currently there are six residents living on-site, homes are located in areas of former waste operations.   Sit
e Contamination/Contaminants: Wilcox site sources include contaminated soil, cooling ponds and numerous tank bottoms. Hazardous substances include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and metals, primarily lead.   Potential Impacts on Surrounding Community/Environment: Currently, a church and six residents are located within the former refinery boundaries, half of which utilize ground water from private wells. Intermittent streams drain the source areas and flow to Sand Creek. A release of copper, lead and PAHs has been documented to the wetlands of Sand Creek. Sand Creek flows to Little Deep Fork Creek from which fish are caught for human consumption.   Respons
e Activities (to date): No formal response activities have been conducted. Multiple sampling events have been conducted by the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality at the request of the EPA Region 6. Preliminary Assessment (PA), Site Investigation (SI) and Expanded Site Investigation (ESI) have been performed at both facilities.   Need for NPL Listing: The state of Oklahoma referred the site to the EPA because the potentially responsible party would not voluntarily address site contamination. Other federal and state cleanup programs were evaluated, but are not viable at this time. The EPA received a letter of support for placing this site on the NPL from the state of Oklahoma. 
 
          [The description of the site (release) is based on information available at the time the site was evaluated with the HRS. The description may change as additional information is gathered on the sources and extent of contamination. See 56 FR 5600, February 11, 1991, or subsequent FR notices.] 
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be found on the Internet at  http://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp or by telephone at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737. 
006728
