NPL Site Narrative for Wilson Concepts of
Florida, Inc.
 
WILSON CONCEPTS OF FLORIDA, INC.
Pompano Beach, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Wilson Concepts of Florida, Inc., Site is at 1408 S.W. 8th
Street in an industrial area of Pompano Beach in northeastern Broward County, Florida. The company
has manufactured precision-machined parts on the 4-acre site since at least 1976. Operations include
machining, drilling, and milling of metal parts, along with vibrating, deburring, degreasing, steam cleaning,
and spray coating of parts.
 
Wilson Concepts is adjacent to Chemform, Inc., which is also being proposed for the NPL at this time.
 
Wilson Concepts has operated since at least 1985 under a hazardous material facility license from the
Broward County Environmental Quality Control Board. On several occasions, the county cited the company
for violations of county regulations in connection with the discharge of industrial wastes (soap cleaners,
degreasers, lubricants, and a product containing mercury and lead) onto the ground and the overflow of
wastes from two 1,200-gallon underground tanks (used to store coolants, cleaners, and sludges) into a
storm drain. The discharges subsequently percolated into the ground.
 
In 1986, EPA detected 1,1,1-trichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethane, chloroethane, vinyl chloride, and 1,1-
dichloroethylene in on-site ground water. Two of the compounds were also found in a water sample from
the storm drain mentioned above.
 
The Biscayne Aquifer, the primary aquifer underlying the site, supplies all municipal water in Broward
County. EPA has designated it a sole source aquifer under the Safe Drinking Water Act. At the site, a
layer of quartz sand overlies the limestone of the aquifer. Numerous cavities in the limestone result in high
horizontal and vertical permeabilities, which facilitate movement of contaminants into ground water as
well as movement of contaminated ground water. At least four municipal well fields are located at least
partially within 3 miles of the site: the City of Pompano Beach's Palm-Aire and Eastern Pompano Beach
Well Fields, serving approximately 80,000 people; and the Broward County District 1B and District 1C Well
Fields (used only during dry periods of the year), serving approximately 13,000 people.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : In December 1988, EPA sent a notice letter to parties potentially responsible for
wastes associated with the site informing them of their potential liability.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
