NPL Site Narrative for Wingate Road
Municipal Incinerator Dump
 
WINGATE ROAD MUNICIPAL INCINERATOR DUMP
Fort Lauderdale, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : The Wingate Road Municipal Incinerator Dump covers 61
acres in Fort Lauderdale, Broward County, Florida. The site includes an incinerator, offices, and an
approximately 40-acre disposal area, all owned and operated by the City of Fort Lauderdale. Land use in
the area is a combination of residential, commercial, and industrial.
 
The incinerator and disposal areas were used during 1955-78. Residential waste, commercial waste, and
incinerator residue were disposed of at the dump. According to a resident of the area, hazardous waste
may also have been dumped. In December 1981, the resident reported to the Broward County Health
Department that 100 steel drums had been buried during 1955-58 north of the incinerator down a dirt road.
 
The facility received 480 tons of waste a day and operated 7 days a week. It pumped cooling water into
the incinerator from on-site wells and then discharged it into an unlined lagoon, possibly Lake Stupid in the
southeast corner of the facility. Ash residues mixed with sludge material from the lagoon were spread onto
the ground in the disposal area. The area is approximately 30 feet above ground, and the terrain is hilly
and partially overgrown with brush and small trees. Rock Pit Lake is downslope of the northeast section of
the disposal area.
 
Tests conducted in 1985 by EPA detected pesticides (DDT, aldrin, chlordane, and dieldrin) in surface
composite soil and subsurface soil from the dump area. Elevated pesticide concentrations were also
reported in sediments from Rock Pit Lake, which is used for recreational activities. The lake intersects the
Biscayne Aquifer, which EPA has designated as a sole source aquifer under the Safe Drinking Water Act.
Thus, there is a threat of contaminants entering the aquifer. An estimated 353,000 people draw drinking
water from four municipal well fields within 3 miles of the site: the Lauderhill Municipal Water Supply Well
Field, the Broward County District 1A Well Field, the Prospect Well Field, and the Dixie Well Field. There is
no unthreatened alternative source for the Lauderhill field.
 
The site is only partially fenced, making it possible for people and animals to come into direct contact with
hazardous substances. Approximately 44,000 people live within 1 mile of the site.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : EPA is conducting a search to identify parties potentially responsible for wastes
associated with the site.
 
The State is reviewing Fort Lauderdale's plan for closing the dump under the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act.
 
Fort Lauderdale has fenced the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
