NPL Site Narrative for Winthrop Landfill
 
WINTHROP LANDFILL
Winthrop, Maine
 
 
Conditions at listing (October 1981) : The Winthrop Landfill is located in Winthrop, Maine, about 10 miles
west of Augusta. The site includes the Winthrop Town Landfill (11 acres) and the adjacent privately-owned
Savage Landfill (9.5 acres). Both landfills are located in an abandoned gravel pit near the shore of Lake
Annabessacook. The town disposed of municipal and industrial wastes at its landfill for nearly 50 years and
did not restrict the types of wastes accepted until the mid-1970s. Late in 1979, an attempt to expand the
landfill revealed numerous rusting and leaking barrels. The town decided to close the landfill and construct
a transfer station on the site. The Savage Landfill contracted to accept municipal solid waste and debris
from two small neighboring towns and also accepted wastes from Winthrop to extend the life of the town
landfill.
 
In September 1981, EPA made available $450,000 under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act for
(1) a remedial investigation to determine the type and extent of contamination at the site and the probable
routes of migration to both private water supplies and Lake Annabessacook and (2) a feasibility study to
identify alternatives for remedial action at the site.
 
Status (July 1983) : The remedial investigation was completed in June 1983. Volatile organics attributable
to the landfill were found to be migrating off-site in ground water. Monitoring wells revealed contamination
with tetrahydrofuran (THF), toluene, methyl ethyl ketone, ethylbenzene, chloroethane, and other volatile
organics. One residential well was found to be contaminated with THF. The feasibility study is scheduled to
be completed in the fourth quarter of 1983.
 
EPA has identified parties potentially responsible for wastes associated with the site and is seeking their
cooperation in the cleanup.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
