NPL Site Narrative for Woodbury Chemical
Co. (Princeton Plant)
 
WOODBURY CHEMICAL CO. (PRINCETON PLANT)
Princeton, Florida
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Woodbury Chemical Co. occupies 3 acres along the west side
of U.S. Route 1 in the southeast section of Dade County approximately 0.5 mile southwest of Princeton,
Florida. Since 1975, the company has blended technical-grade materials in 50-gallon vats to produce
pesticides and fertilizers.
 
The site consists of six buildings, including an office, warehouses, and production buildings, as well as
several above-ground storage tanks, the majority of which are diked. Most of the facility grounds are
paved. The surrounding area is primarily agricultural, with populations concentrated in the small towns of
Princeton and Goulds. Previously, the site was a tomato- and potato-repacking house and a labor camp for
farm workers.
 
In 1986, EPA identified aldrin, dieldrin, toxaphene, and chlordane in four surficial soil samples from the site
vicinity.
 
The Biscayne Aquifer underlying the site supplies drinking water to an estimated 17,600 residents of Dade
County within 3 miles of the site. EPA has designated the aquifer under the Safe Drinking Water Act as the
sole source of drinking water for Dade County. A layer of quartz sand overlies the oolite limestone of the
aquifer; both formations are highly permeable, facilitating the horizontal and vertical movement of ground
water, which is about 7 feet below the surface. Three well fields and several private wells are within 3 miles
of the site. The well fields include the Elevated Tank Well Field approximately 2.6 miles south of the site,
the Naranja Well Field approximately 1.5 miles to the southwest, and the Homestead Air Force Base Well
Field approximately 2.5 miles south. A private well is 570 feet from the site.
 
A canal owned and operated by the State is approximately 2,350 feet northeast of the site. It flows into
Biscayne Bay.
 
Status (August 30, 1990) : In January 1990, Woodbury Chemical removed toxaphene-contaminated
soils from the southeast corner of the site. The work was performed under the direction of EPA and Dade
County.
 
In March 1990, EPA issued a "special notice letter" offering Woodbury Chemical the opportunity to conduct
a remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the type and extent of contamination at the
site and identify alternatives for remedial action. EPA is reviewing Woodbury Chemical's response.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
