NPL Site Narrative for Woodbrook Road
Dump
 
WOODBROOK ROAD DUMP
South Plainfield, New Jersey
 
 
Conditions at Proposal (September 13, 2001) : The Woodbrook Road Dump site (Dismal Swamp) is
an inactive, non-permitted dumping area located in South Plainfield, Middlesex County, New Jersey. The
site, which is bisected by Bound Brook, has approximately 34 acres. It is located on two undeveloped
properties north of Woodbrook Road. The properties are within wetlands of the Dismal Swamp, a natural
wildlife refuge designated as "priority wetlands" by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Both parcels are currently owned by Texas Eastern Terminal
Company (TETCO), a subsidiary of Duke Energy Corporation. The properties were operated as dumps
by previous owners during the 1940s and 1950s, accepting household and industrial wastes until shut
down by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) in 1958. Investigations at the
site have revealed the presence of household refuse, building debris, automotive parts, large quantities of
bottles, and leaking electrical capacitors.
 
The leaking capacitors were discovered in September 1999. On September 13, 1999, NJDEP sampled
the material inside one capacitor, and recorded greater than 50 parts per million (ppm) of polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs). NJDEP referred the Dismal Swamp site to the EPA for removal action consideration
in October 1999. EPA performed an investigation of the site in October 1999, observing that the leaking
capacitors were located at a swampy meadow area next to a small stream in Dismal Swamp. EPA
collected soil, sediment, and sludge samples in and near the capacitors. Sludge and soil samples showed
extremely elevated concentrations of PCBs. Metals analysis was performed for one soil sample, showing
elevated levels of lead and smaller amounts of other heavy metals, including mercury, selenium, and
thallium. EPA performed oversight of capacitor removal by the property owner on March 8 and 9, 2000.
The condition of the capacitors ranged from intact and unrusted to completely rusted or no outside
covering.
 
EPA conducted an Integrated Assessment at the site in July 2000. Surface water, sediment, drinking water
well, and background soil samples were collected. The results of the sampling showed PCBs in on-site
soil samples at elevated concentrations. Lead and other hazardous substances detected in on-site soils
at elevated concentrations include bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate, benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(b)fluoranthene,
benzo(a)pyrene, indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene, antimony, arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium, cobalt, mercury,
and zinc.
 
PCBs were detected in the surface water and sediment samples collected from the Secondary Tributary
at elevated concentrations. The Secondary Tributary receives runoff from the area where the leaking
capacitors were found. The surface water and sediment samples contaminated with PCBs delineate
approximately 4,370 feet of wetland frontage subject to actual contamination. There are approximately 11
additional miles of wetland frontage along the surface water pathway potentially threatened beyond the
contaminated portion. The contaminated stream within the Dismal Swamp converges into Bound Brook,
which since 1998 has a fish consumption advisory due to PCB contamination related to a site located
within 1.4 mile downstream of the Woodbrook Road Dump site.
 
The property owner has found evidence of people using the site for recreation. The trails at the site are
used for nature hikes. Hunters and recreational vehicle users have been observed in the area where the
leaking capacitors where found despite actions taken by the property owner and EPA to limit access.
Preventive measures included installation of a fence and warning signs around the disposal area, and
installation of guard rails and warning signs at access points to the site.
 
Ground water threatened by the Woodbrook Road Dump site serves approximately 62,000 people. The
downstream surface water pathway includes Bound Brook and the Raritan River, which are classified
as fisheries. The total population within 4 miles of the site is approximately 186,000 people. There are
approximately 3,000 acres of wetlands located within four miles of the site.
 
Status (April 2003) : EPA is considering various alternatives for this site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
