NPL Site Narrative for Wright-Patterson
Air Force Base
 
WRIGHT-PATTERSON AIR FORCE BASE
Dayton, Ohio
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Wright-Patterson Air Force Base (WPAFB) is in southwestern
Ohio northeast of Dayton in Greene and Montgomery Counties. The installation is composed of two air
fields, Wright Field and Patterson Field, covering 8,174 acres. The base employs approximately 33,000
people, of whom about 8,000 presently live on the base.
 
Past Air Force activities in support of operational missions have resulted in creation of several unlined
waste disposal areas throughout the base, including landfills, fire training areas, and coal storage piles.
From 1941 to at least 1973, the Industrial Shops and the Research and Development Laboratories
disposed of more than 791 tons of waste on the base, including solvents, contaminated thinners,
degreasing sludges, tetraethyllead sludge, and miscellaneous hazardous chemicals.
 
In 1985, the base, with the assistance of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA), found 1,1,1-
trichloroethane, tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene, 1,2-dichloroethane, and manganese in on-base
wells. The Miami River Valley Aquifer System, which is the predominant water source in the Dayton and
WPAFB area, provides water to three municipal well fields within 3 miles that serve more than 375,000
people. The people working and living on the base are served by 16 base wells. Local surface waters are
also potentially threatened by inactive waste sites on the base.
 
Under OEPA Consent Orders, issued on February 9, 1988 under CERCLA and the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA), the Air Force will conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine
the type and extent of contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
WPAFB is participating in the Installation Restoration Program, established in 1978. Under this
program, the Department of Defense seeks to identify, investigate, and clean up contamination from
hazardous materials. The base has completed the equivalent of a preliminary assessment and site
inspection. WPAFB will recommend that all contaminated areas either be further evaluated via a remedial
investigation/feasibility study, be addressed via an immediate remedial action, or be designated as
requiring no further action. The landfills identified as primary sources of contamination have been proposed
for immediate remedial action.
 
Status (October 4, 1989) : OEPA, EPA, and the Air Force are negotiating a CERCLA Section 120
Interagency Agreement covering all activities at WPAFB.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
