NPL Site Narrative for Wyckoff Co./Eagle
Harbor
 
WYCKOFF CO./EAGLE HARBOR
Bainbridge Island, Washington
 
 
Conditions at proposal (September 18, 1985) : The Wyckoff Co./Eagle Harbor Site covers about 50
acres on Bainbridge Island, Kitsap County, Washington. Operations started in the early 1900s. In the past,
Wyckoff stored and used pentachlorophenol and creosote to treat wood on the site. Current operations use
creosote only.
 
Until 1981, waste water (over 23 million gallons) was discharged to a seepage basin on-site, and sludge
was buried on-site. In 1981, a closed-loop effluent system was installed. The company has identified some
sludge disposal areas and removed the sludge. However, some sludge probably remains.
 
Creosote-like materials have seeped into subsoils at many points within the site to a depth of at least 30
feet, according to tests conducted by a contractor for Wyckoff. Sediment samples from Eagle Harbor show
high concentrations of aromatic hydrocarbons that suggest a creosote origin. The State found similar
contamination in clam and crab tissue from Eagle Harbor immediately adjacent to the facility. Most of the
more than 100 residents in the Eagle Harbor area rely on community and private wells from the sea-level
aquifer for their drinking water. The harbor is used for fishing, swimming, and boating.
 
In August 1984, EPA issued an order under Section 3013 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
requiring Wyckoff to investigate soil and ground water at the site.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : EPA is evaluating data provided by Wyckoff under the order. The Wyckoff
data indicate that ground water on-site is contaminated with creosote compounds. In addition, EPA is
collecting the on-site data necessary to plan an expedited response action to deal with the ground water
contamination and seepage problems. Later in 1987, EPA is scheduled to begin a remedial investigation/
feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination of harbor sediments and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
