NPL Site Narrative for Yeoman Creek
Landfill
 
YEOMAN CREEK LANDFILL
Waukegan, Illinois
 
 
Conditions at proposal (June 24, 1988) : Yeoman Creek Landfill covers 14 acres southeast of the
intersection of Sunset Avenue and Lewis Avenue in Waukegan, Lake County, Illinois. Apartments and
businesses surround the site. TIK City Disposal and National Disposal Contractors operated the landfill
during 1959-69. No information is available on types or quantities of wastes accepted. When the landfill
stopped accepting waste, the operators covered it with 3 to 6 feet of soil and seeded it. Currently, the site
is owned and maintained by Waukegan School District #60.
 
Sediments of Yeoman Creek at the landfill and farther downstream at Yeoman Park contain PCBs and
other organic chemicals, according to tests conducted by EPA in April 1985. Yeoman Creek is a tributary
of the Waukegan River, which feeds into Lake Michigan. Over 67,000 persons in Waukegan are supplied
with drinking water from a Lake Michigan intake 10,000 feet downstream of contaminants found in Yeoman
Creek at Yeoman Park.
 
The landfill has no liner, and the underlying soils are permeable, conditions that facilitate movement of
contaminants into ground water. About 1,500 people draw drinking water from private wells within 3 miles
of the site. The nearest well is 2,000 feet away. No municipal supplies are available in the area served by
the wells.
 
The landfill is unfenced and unguarded. Leachate has been observed seeping into Yeoman Creek during
State inspections. Thus, people and animals in the area can come into direct contact with hazardous
substances.
 
Status (March 31, 1989) : EPA is considering various alternatives for the site.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
