NPL Site Narrative for York Oil Co.
 
YORK OIL CO.
Moira, New York
 
 
Conditions at listing (July 1982) : York Oil Co. formerly recycled waste oils on a 17-acre site in Moira,
New York. The State identified the facility as an environmental problem after it was sold to local residents.
The site consists of two storage tanks filled with PCB-contaminated oil, one graded lagoon, and two
consolidated lagoons which are filled with PCB-contaminated soils and sludges and capped with kiln dust
and sand. Before the site was abandoned, it consisted of eight steel storage tanks, two buildings, and three
lagoons.
 
The berms of the lagoons have failed in the past, discharging oil into the adjacent wetlands that drain into
Lawrence Brook. Analyses indicate 50 parts per million (ppm) of PCBs in lagoon waters, over 500 ppm in
lagoon sludge, up to 26 parts per billion (ppb) in ground water, and up to 350 ppm in solids. In 1980 and
1981, using about $790,000 made available under Section 311 of the Clean Water Act and CERCLA, EPA
took steps to minimize off-site migration of PCBs. Actions included closing the facility, partially cleaning
up the wetlands area, treating oil wastes from one of the lagoons, and interim closing of the remaining two
lagoons. However, oil, soil, and sludges containing PCBs remain at the site and adjacent wetlands. The
site threatens the area wildlife as well as the wetlands. The threat to the area's drinking water is undefined
at present.
 
Status (July 1983) : In June 1983, using CERCLA emergency funds, EPA collected seeping oil,
constructed filter fences, posted warning signs, and placed barriers to prevent vehicles from entering.
Concurrently, EPA is negotiating a Cooperative Agreement with New York to perform a remedial
investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of contamination that remains and identify
alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
