NPL Site Narrative for York County Solid
Waste and Refuse Authority Landfill
 
YORK COUNTY SOLID WASTE AND REFUSE AUTHORITY
LANDFILL
Hopewell Township, Pennsylvania
 
 
Conditions at proposal (April 10, 1985) : The York County Solid Waste and Refuse Authority (SWRA)
Landfill has accepted municipal wastes since 1974. The landfilled portion occupies about 100 acres in
Hopewell Township, York County, Pennsylvania. The site is permitted by the State and currently receives
an average of 400 tons of municipal and industrial wastes per day.
 
Sampling by SWRA and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources (PA DER) has shown
that ground water off-site is contaminated by several organic chemicals, including tetrachloroethylene,
1,1,1-trichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethane, and methyl ethyl ketone.
 
In May 1984, PA DER entered into a Consent Agreement with SWRA. The agreement requires SWRA
to continue ground water monitoring, provide bottled water to affected residents, and develop plans for
returning the ground water to its original state.
 
About 26 homes in the immediate vicinity of the site have been placed on bottled water, while 2,200
people continue to receive their drinking water from the monitored ground water within 3 miles of the site.
Monitoring of this aquifer will detect the migration of contaminated ground water to the drinking water
supply for these people.
 
Status (July 22, 1987) : Activities continue under the Consent Agreement. PA DER is negotiating
with SWRA to conduct a remedial investigation/feasibility study to determine the type and extent of
contamination at the site and identify alternatives for remedial action.
 
For more information about the hazardous substances identified in this narrative summary, including
general information regarding the effects of exposure to these substances on human health, please see
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) ToxFAQs. ATSDR ToxFAQs can be
found on the Internet at ATSDR - ToxFAQs   (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/index.asp) or by telephone
at 1-888-42-ATSDR or 1-888-422-8737.
